A multimodal investigation of visuospatial attention asymmetries in humans

A thesis Submitted by Daniel P Newman, BPsySc (Hons), in fulfilment of the degree of Doctor of Philosophy (PhD).
 March, 2016
School of Psychological Sciences
Monash University
Melbourne
Australia 
Copyright notice
© Daniel P. Newman (2016). Except as provided in the Copyright Act 1968, this thesis may not be reproduced in any form without the written permission of the author.



 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT	1
LIST OF PUBLICATIONS, PRESENTATIONS, AWARDS & CONTRIBUTIONS DURING CANDIDATURE	3
Journal publications	3
Presentations	4
Awards	5
Other Contributions	5
GENERAL DECLARATION	6
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS	8
Chapter 1: INTRODUCTION	9
Measures of visuospatial asymmetry	11
‘Right hemisphere dominance’ versus ‘interhemispheric competition’ accounts of visuospatial asymmetry	15
Alertness and visuospatial asymmetry	16
Non-spatial attention and visuospatial asymmetry	17
Dopamine and visuospatial asymmetry	18
Other putative moderators of visuospatial asymmetry	19
Alpha (α) power and visuospatial asymmetry	22
Research Aims	24
Chapter 2: ALERTNESS AS A STATE MODULATOR OF VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION ASYMMETRY	25
Declaration for Thesis Chapter 2	26
Preamble to peer reviewed paper 1	27
Follow-up: Stratification of the “time-on-task” effect by dopamine transporter genotype	37
Chapter 3: OBSERVER SUBTYPES FOR VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION SHIFT OVER TIME?	39
Declaration for Thesis Chapter 3	40
Preamble to peer reviewed paper 2	41
Chapter 4: THE EFFECT OF BLUE ENRICHED LIGHT ON ALERTNESS AND VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION ASYMMETRY	50
Declaration for Thesis Chapter 4	51
Preamble to paper currently under peer review	52
Chapter 5: DOPAMINE TRANSPORTER GENOTYPE AND BEHAVIOURAL MEASURES OF VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION ASYMMETRY	63
Declaration for Thesis Chapter 5	64
Preamble to peer reviewed paper 3	65
Follow-up: Testing for an effect of time-on-task on the relationship between dopamine transporter genotype and distractor hemifield	74
Chapter 6: GENERAL DISCUSSION	75
Summary and implications of findings	76
Limitations	77
Ideas for future research	78
Conclusion	86
REFERENCES	87
Appendix 1	110
Supplemental Material for Chapter 3: Newman et al (2014). Neuropsychologia.	110
Appendix 2	127
Newman et al. (2012)	127
Appendix 3	134
Supplemental Material for Chapter 4: Newman et al (2016). Scientific Reports.	134
Appendix 4	137
Supplemental Material for Chapter 5: Newman et al (2014). Journal of Neuroscience.	137
Appendix 5	141
Silk, Newman et al. (2014)	141
Appendix 6	147
Loughnane, Newman, et al. (2014)	147

 
ABSTRACT 
The degree to which each cerebral hemisphere manages different information processing roles is one of the most enduring questions of brain science. Understanding hemispheric specialisation in the healthy brain aids the prediction of functional outcomes for patients with acquired brain injury, such as unilateral spatial neglect, and may also provide insights into a number of prominent disorders in which  hemispheric lateralisation appears to be atypical, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).  Behavioural measures have shown that healthy subjects tend to exhibit a subtle bias (or ‘asymmetry’) of visual attention favouring left space, termed ‘pseudoneglect’, where visual stimuli in the left hemifield are processed more quickly or accurately than stimuli on the right, and spatial attention is oriented more efficiently towards the left than right. This phenomenon is thought to reflect right hemisphere lateralisation of the networks governing spatial attention. Although a range of indirect evidence also suggests that visuospatial biases can be modulated by non-spatial factors, such as alertness, the underlying physiology for this interaction has remained unclear.  This thesis aimed to further understand the biological drivers of visuospatial attentional bias in neurological healthy subjects, examining the impact of state factors such as alertness and trait factors such as genetics on visuospatial bias. 
The first experimental chapter of this thesis examined the neurophysiological bases of the rightward shift in attention bias that is observed with declining alertness over time-on-task. Posterior  -band EEG - a marker of cortical excitability linked to spatial attention orienting   was recorded from healthy participants who detected transient, unilateral visual targets while also monitoring stimuli at fixation.  Asymmetry indices were derived for both lateral target reaction times and hemispheric differences in  -activity before lateral target onsets.  Pre-target   became more prominent over the right, relative to left, hemisphere as the task progressed over 48-min, and this change was correlated with a significant rightward shift in spatial bias. Contrary to past studies of posterior  -asymmetry and orienting, here participants did not receive pre-target cues. Thus we show that asymmetries in the hemispheric distribution of anticipatory   are not only apparent during externally-cued attention orienting, but are also sensitive to decreasing alertness over time.  These data were the first to link rightward attention drift over time with change in hemispheric activation asymmetry, providing important implications for our understanding of interacting spatial attention and non-spatial alertness networks. The second experimental chapter extends on this research by showing that contrary to the suggestions of other recently published work, the direction and magnitude of attention bias exhibited by a participant early in an attention task is unlikely to represent a stable trait that predicts the direction of their subsequent shift in spatial bias over time-on-task. This chapter concluded that although evidence supports both the contention that trait-like individual differences in spatial bias exist within the healthy population, no clear evidence is yet available for participant/observer subtypes in the direction of time-on-task shift in spatial biases.  The third experimental chapter then provides direct evidence for the influence of alertness on spatial attention. This chapter asked if exposure to blue-enriched light (which is known to increase alertness) could activate right-hemisphere attention networks, thus enhancing attention to left space. Our results showed that exposure to higher, relative to lower, intensity blue-enriched light enhanced response-times for stimuli in the left, but not right, visual hemifield. This processing benefit was mediated by a specific effect of light intensity on right-hemisphere parieto-occipital  -power. These behavioural and neurophysiological effects were sustained over task duration (~36 minutes). These data provide evidence for a direct modulatory influence of alertness on the physiological substrates of spatial attention, using a non-invasive, non-pharmacological manipulation of alertness which lasts post light exposure. The final experimental chapter aimed to assess genetic influence on spatial attention bias. Two putatively functional tandem repeat polymorphisms of the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1;SLC6A3) which are argued to influence the level of available synaptic dopamine and confer risk to disorders of inattention, were selected a priori and tested for an association with spatial attention bias. As expected, results suggested that participants without the 10-repeat allele of the DAT1 tandem repeat polymorphism possess an enhanced attentional ability to suppress task-irrelevant stimuli in the left hemifield.
The findings of this thesis converge to show that both trait and state factors influence visuospatial attention bias. The exciting finding that right hemisphere activation and visuospatial attention bias can be directly manipulated by exposure to blue enriched light gives rise to the tantalising possibility of light-based interventions for right hemisphere disorders of spatial attention such as unilateral spatial neglect. Future studies will benefit from testing the generalisation of this effect of blue enriched light on spatial attention across different contexts and in different samples.
 
LIST OF PUBLICATIONS, PRESENTATIONS, AWARDS & CONTRIBUTIONS DURING CANDIDATURE
The candidate has spent time engaging in multiple opportunities for research collaboration throughout this candidature, leading to the 10 journal publications listed below. Only a subset of these publications** have been chosen to contribute towards this thesis. Of those publications not included in this thesis, those of particular note are Loughnane et al. (2016) for which the candidate invested considerable time towards conception, design, and data collection (attached in Appendix 6); and Silk et al. (2014) for which the candidate invested considerable time towards data analysis and writing (attached in Appendix 5).
Journal publications
** Newman, D. P., Lockley, S. W., Loughnane, G. M., Martins, A. C. P., Abe, R., Zoratti, M.
T. R., Kelly, S. P., O Neill, M. H., Rajaratnam, S. M. W., O Connell, R. G., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2016). Ocular exposure to blue-enriched light has an asymmetric influence on neural activity and spatial attention. Scientific Reports. 6, 27754. 
Loughnane, G. M., Newman, D. P., Lalor, E. C., Bellgrove, M. A., Kelly, S. P., &
O Connell, R, G. (2016). Target selection signals influence perceptual decisions by modulating the onset and rate of evidence accumulation. Current Biology (In press). 
Wang, E., Sun, L., Sun, M., Huang, J., Tao, Y., Zhao, X., Wu, Z., Ding, Y., Newman, D. P.,
Bellgrove, M, A., Wang, Y., & Song, Y. (2016). Attentional Selection and Suppression in Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging (In press). 
Morey, R. D., Chambers, C. D., Etchells, P. J., Harris, C. R., Hoekstra, R., Lakens, D.,
Lewandowsky, S., Morey, C. C., Newman, D. P., Sch nbrodt, F. D., Vanpaemel, W., Wagenmakers, E-J., Zwaan, R. A. (2016). The Peer Reviewers  Openness Initiative: incentivizing open research practices through peer review. Royal Society Open Science, 3(1), 150547.
Tong, J. H. S., Cummins, T. D. R., Johnson, B. P., McKinley, L.-A., Pickering, H. E.,
Fanning, P., Stefanac, N, R., Newman, D, P., Hawi, Z., Bellgrove, M. A. (2015). An association between a dopamine transporter gene (SLC6A3) haplotype and ADHD symptom measures in nonclinical adults. American Journal of Medical Genetics. Part B, Neuropsychiatric Genetics :168B(2), 89 96. 
**Newman, D. P., Cummins, T. D. R., Tong, J. H. S., Johnson, B. P., Pickering, H., Fanning,
P.,   Bellgrove, M. A. (2014). Dopamine transporter genotype is associated with a lateralized resistance to distraction during attention selection. The Journal of Neuroscience, 34(47), 15743 50. 
**Newman, D. P., Loughnane, G. M., Abe, R., Zoratti, M. T. R., Martins, A. C. P., van den
Bogert, P. C.,   Bellgrove, M. A. (2014). Differential shift in spatial bias over time depends on observers  initial bias: Observer subtypes, or regression to the mean? Neuropsychologia, 64, 33 40. 
Silk, T. J., Newman, D. P., Eramudugolla, R., Vance, A., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2014).
Influence of methylphenidate on spatial attention asymmetry in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Preliminary findings. Neuropsychologia, 56(1), 178 183. 
Bellgrove, M. A., Eramudugolla, R., Newman, D. P., Vance, A., & Mattingley, J. B. (2013).
Influence of attentional load on spatial attention in acquired and developmental disorders of attention. Neuropsychologia, 51(6), 1085 1093.
**Newman, D. P., O Connell, R. G., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2013). Linking time-on-task,
spatial bias and hemispheric activation asymmetry: A neural correlate of rightward attention drift. Neuropsychologia, 51(7), 1215 1223.

Presentations
Invited Talks
Society for Neuroscience (Chicago, 20th of Oct 2015). Ocular exposure to short wavelength light modulates behavioural and electrophysiological markers of spatial attention bias.

Deakin University Cognitive Neuroscience Unit (CNU) Monthly Meeting (13th of Nov 2014). Spatial Attention Asymmetries in Healthy Populations and in Disorders of Attention. 

Monash Biomedical Imaging Science Seminar. (11th of July 2013). Tracing the formation of perceptual decisions in the human brain: A new approach to the study of visuospatial attention asymmetries.

Conference Posters
Newman DP, Loughnane GM, Kelly SP, O Connell RG, Bellgrove MA (2014). Visuospatial
attention bias and ADHD: A behavioural and electrophysiological analysis. 4th Annual Conference of Biological Psychiatry Australia (BPA), 2014.
Newman DP, Loughnane GM, Abe R, Zoratti MT, Kelly SP, O Connell RG, Bellgrove MA
(2014). Inter-hemispheric activation asymmetry and trial-to-trial fluctuations in alertness: An electrophysiological and pupillometric investigation. 12th International Conference on Cognitive Neuroscience, 2014.
Newman DP, Cummins TDR, Tong JHS, Johnson BP, Pickering HP, Fanning P, Wagner J,
Goodrich JTT, Hawi Z, Chambers CD, & Bellgrove MA. (2014). Dopamine transporter genotype is associated with a lateralised resistance to distraction during attention selection. 12th International Conference on Cognitive Neuroscience, 2014.
Loughnane, GM, Newman, DP, Kelly, SP, Lalor, EC, Bellgrove, MA & O Connell, RG
(2014). Visuospatial attention influences the rate of evidence accumulation during perceptual decision making. 12th International Conference on Cognitive Neuroscience, 2014.
Wagner J, Newman DP, Loughnane GM, Kelly SP, O Connell RG, Bellgrove MA (2014).
Visuospatial attention bias is related to attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) symptomology: A behavioural and electrophysiological analysis. 12th International Conference on Cognitive Neuroscience, 2014.
Loughnane, GM, Newman, DP, Kelly, SP, Lalor, EC, Bellgrove, MA & O Connell, RG
(2013). Visuospatial attention asymmetries are indexed by a temporal lag in the accumulation of sensory evidence. 2013 Neuroscience Meeting Planner. San Diego. Society for Neuroscience, 2013. 
Awards
Poster presentation prize at the Monash University Neuroscience Showcase of Early Career Research (December 2014)
Other Contributions
Media Coverage: Culture-shifting new initiative to make  open science  a reality (2016) http://phys.org/news/2016-01-culture-shifting-science-reality.html (January 13, 2016).

Science Communication: The candidate has maintained a research related blog and website throughout candidature: http://dpnewman.com/my-blog/

Article Reviewer: For the Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society 
GENERAL DECLARATION

Declaration for thesis based or partially based on conjointly published or unpublished work:
In accordance with Monash University Doctorate Regulation 17.2 Doctor of Philosophy and
Research Master s regulations the following declarations are made.

I hereby declare that this thesis contains no material which has been accepted for the award of any other degree or diploma at any university or equivalent institution and that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, this thesis contains no material previously published or written by another person, except where due reference is made in the text of the thesis. This thesis includes 4 original papers published in peer reviewed journals. The core theme of the thesis is spatial attention asymmetries in humans. The ideas, development and writing up of all the papers in the thesis were the principal responsibility of myself, the candidate, working within the School of Psychological Sciences under the supervision of Professor Mark A Bellgrove and Dr Redmond G O Connell (Trinity College Dublin). The inclusion of co-authors reflects the fact that the work came from active collaboration between researchers and acknowledges input into team-based research. In the case of Chapter s 2, 3, 4, and 5 my contribution to the work involved the following:
 
Thesis chapter	Publication title	Publication status 	Candidate s contribution
Two	Linking Time-on-task,
Spatial Bias and Hemispheric Activation Asymmetry: A Neural Correlate of  Rightward Attention Drift	Published	70% contribution by candidate: Conception and design, review of relevant literature, recruitment and testing of participants, data analysis and manuscript write-up
Three	Differential shift in spatial bias over time depends on observers  initial bias: observer subtypes, or regression to the mean?	Published	70% contribution by candidate: Conception and design, review of relevant literature, recruitment and testing of participants, data analysis and manuscript write-up
Four	Ocular exposure to blue-enriched light has an asymmetric influence on neural activity and spatial attention	Published	70% contribution by candidate: Conception and design, review of relevant literature, recruitment and testing of participants, data analysis and manuscript write-up
Five	Dopamine transporter genotype is associated with a lateralized resistance to distraction during attention selection	Published	50% contribution by candidate: Review of relevant literature, data analysis and manuscript write-up

I have / have not renumbered sections of submitted or published papers in order to generate a consistent presentation within the thesis.

Signed:	  

Date:		07/02/2016
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First, thank you to my supervisors, Prof Mark Bellgrove (primary supervisor) and Dr Redmond O Connell (associate supervisor), who have proved to be excellent mentors, supervisors, colleagues, and also excellent friends to me over the course of this doctorate. Not only have their scientific insights been vital for the success of this thesis, but also their wit, sense of humour, and sense of fun has made this 3.5 year candidature as enjoyable as possible.  The same goes for Dr Gerard Loughnane. I have collaborated with Gerard on many different projects throughout this candidature and he has been a great scientist and a great friend. 

The longstanding members of the Bellgrove lab - Ziarih Hawi, Janette Tong, Megan O'Neill, Beth Johnson, Tarrant Cummins   have been a source of friendship and support over the course of this doctorate, I thank them for that.  I have enjoyed helping to supervise a number of different interns in the Bellgrove lab throughout this candidature, but a special mention must go to three of these - Rafael Abe, Marco Zoratti and Ana Carina Martins - who all made such an outstanding effort in helping me with data collection during their internships, and who all became good friends of mine along the way. 

I am thankful for financial support over the last 3.5 years by my APA scholarship from the Australian Government s Department of Education and Training. Funding towards the research in this thesis came from two government research funding bodies, NHMRC and ARC, and for that I am grateful. I am also grateful for the participants who gave up their time to participate in the studies comprising this thesis. 

Most importantly, thank you to my whole family, and particularly Mary and Ross Newman (Mum and Dad) for their continuous love and support.  Finally, thank you to my partner Amy Quinton, for sharing her great sense of humour and fun, passion for life, intellect, love and patience with me throughout.




 










CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
 
Hemispheric specialisation, or the degree to which each cerebral hemisphere manages different information processing roles, is perhaps the most enduring area of inquiry by the brain sciences (Bradshaw, 1989; Bryden, 1982).  Despite the human brain s apparent anatomical symmetry, neurologists  first uncovered evidence for left hemisphere dominance in processing verbal information well over a century ago (Broca, 1861; Wernicke, 1874), describing patients with left hemisphere damage leading to language problems. Evidence for right hemisphere specialisation in spatial attention processing began to emerge during the twentieth century (Bogen & Gazzaniga, 1965; De Renzi, 1985; Young & Ratcliff, 1983). These discoveries still stand today with the advent of modern brain imaging broadly showing a subtle dominance of the left hemisphere over the right for language processing (Hickok & Poeppel, 2007) and a subtle right hemisphere dominance for attentional processing, in the majority of people (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011; Husain & Rorden, 2003). Such hemispheric specialisation may arise from faster intrahemispheric conduction compared to relatively slow conduction between the hemispheres (Marzi, Bisiacchi, & Nicoletti, 1991; Ringo, Doty, Demeter, & Simard, 1994). It also reduces process duplication between the hemispheres. Corballis (1991, 2009) argues that duplication of processes increase the chance of interhemispheric conflict, so complementary hemispheric specialisation may help efficient computation. Indeed, complementary hemispheric specialisation is evident in the case of language and visuospatial processing, such that people with more left hemisphere dominant language processing have more right hemisphere dominant visuospatial processing (Cai, Van Der Haegen, & Brysbaert, 2013).

Understanding hemispheric specialisation in the healthy brain aids the prediction of functional outcomes for patients who suffer unilateral brain lesions, and may also provide insights into a number of prominent disorders in which usual hemispheric lateralisation appears to be altered, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (An et al., 2013; Booth et al., 2005; Cortese et al., 2013; Makris et al., 2008; Shaw et al., 2009; Silk, Vance, Rinehart, Bradshaw, & Cunnington, 2008; Sowell et al., 2003; Stefanatos & Wasserstein, 2001; Vance et al., 2007; Ter Huurne et al., 2013). Behavioural measures show that healthy subjects tend to exhibit a subtle bias or asymmetry of visual attention favouring left space, termed  pseudoneglect  (Bowers & Heilman, 1980), where visual stimuli in the left hemifield are processed slightly more quickly or accurately than stimuli on the right, and spatial attention is oriented more efficiently towards the left than right. This is documented using a variety of visual stimuli and is thought to reflect right hemisphere lateralisation of the networks governing spatial attention (Jewell & McCourt, 2000; Loftus & Nicholls, 2012; Mesulam, 1981; Nicholls, Bradshaw, & Mattingley, 1999; Voyer et al., 2012). Reversal of this leftward advantage appears to mark neurological vulnerability across a number of acquired and developmental disorders, including unilateral spatial neglect (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011), ADHD (Bellgrove et al., 2013; Chan et al., 2009; Geeraerts, Lafosse, Vaes, Vandenbussche, & Verfaillie, 2007; Sheppard, Bradshaw, Mattingley, & Lee, 1999; Voeller & Heilman, 1988), dyslexia (Facoetti, Turatto, Lorusso, & Mascetti, 2001; Hari, Renvall, & Tanskanen, 2001; Liddle, Jackson, Rorden, & Jackson, 2009; Stenneken et al., 2011) and schizophrenia (David, 1993; Ribolsi et al., 2013; Voyer et al., 2012).  These disorders share a qualitatively similar behavioural phenotype  leftward inattention   which suggests some underlying disruption/s of the normally right hemisphere dominant attention networks.  Although the spatial asymmetries seen in disordered and neurologically healthy populations are most often opposite in direction (left-neglect vs. pseudoneglect), the factors influencing the distribution of attention in space appear largely continuous (e.g. Newman, O Connell, & Bellgrove, 2013).  For this reason, studying the biological drivers of attentional asymmetry in neurologically healthy individuals may offer important insights for clinical disorders. 
Measures of visuospatial asymmetry
Divided Visual Field Methodology
Before the advent of modern imaging techniques, researchers used behavioural experiments to investigate hemispheric specialisation in healthy volunteers by exploiting the contralateral arrangement of the primary visual and auditory systems (Voyer, 1996). For example, divided visual-field methodology takes advantage of the arrangement of the retina-geniculate-striate pathway such that information from one visual field is transmitted to the opposite side of the brain for initial processing.  By ensuring that subjects fixate their gaze centrally (using eye tracking technology or by displaying lateralised stimuli for periods that are too brief to allow an eye movement) one can control the hemisphere to which visual information initially travels.  Thus any systematic differences between the left and right visual field in accuracy or reaction time to stimuli reflect differences in early processing abilities between the hemispheres (Bourne, 2006).  Likewise, auditory asymmetries are observed using dichotic listening methodology (Hugdahl, 1988), where different sounds are presented simultaneously to each ear, showing subtle right-ear dominance (thought to reflect left hemisphere specialisation) for verbal stimuli and a left-ear dominance (right hemisphere specialisation) for non-verbal stimuli (McGilchrist, 2009).
	A variety of paradigms employing divided visual field methodology are sensitive to pseudoneglect (left visual field advantage) in healthy participants. For example dual stream RSVP paradigms, where participants fixate centrally and monitor a bilateral stream of rapidly appearing stimuli for transient targets, consistently show a processing advantage for the left visual field, characteristic of pseudoneglect (Holl nder, Corballis, & Hamm, 2005; Holl nder, Hausmann, Hamm, & Corballis, 2005; Scalf, Banich, Kramer, Narechania, & Simon, 2007; Smigasiewicz et al., 2010; Verleger et al., 2010; Verleger,  migasiewicz, & M ller, 2011). This leftward bias/asymmetry for the dual stream RSVP persists when central fixation is carefully controlled using eye tracking technology (Verleger et al., 2009) and when the participants  native language is read from right-to-left or  when stimuli are presented along a vertical axis rather than from left-to-right (Smigasiewicz et al., 2010). Divided visual field methodology is also used to successfully measure such spatial asymmetries via lateralised temporal order judgment paradigms, where participants fixate centrally and judge which stimulus appears first out of a pair of stimuli (one appearing in each visual field) that are briefly presented at slightly different stimulus onset asynchronies. Under these circumstances participants tend to perceive stimuli in the left visual field as appearing earlier than stimuli in the right visual field (e.g. Dobler et al., 2005; Liddle et al., 2009; Matthews, Welch, Festa, & Clement, 2013; Alejandro P rez et al., 2009). 
Partial and whole report paradigms based on Bundesen's (1990) theory of visual attention (TVA) also use divided visual field methodology. During tasks based on TVA, participants fixate centrally and detect transient letter arrays. Parameter values derived using the TVA (such as processing speed, short term memory storage capacity, perceptual threshold and spatial attentional weighting) are purportedly mathematically independent and thus allow differentiation between the different components of visual attention (Dyrholm, Kyllingsb k, Espeseth, & Bundesen, 2011; Kyllingsb k, 2006). TVA paradigms confirm that healthy subjects tend to show a subtle leftward bias in spatial attentional weighting (i.e. pseudoneglect) (Finke et al., 2005; Matthias et al., 2010; Matthias et al., 2009; Stenneken et al., 2011). Ensuring eye fixation has an added advantage of reducing eye-movement related artefacts when recording electroencephalogram (EEG) as well as behaviour. For this reason, the experiments in this thesis capitalise on fixation controlled divided visual field methodologies.  However there are a number of influential free-viewing paradigms that are also sensitive to spatial bias which are briefly discussed below. 
Free-Viewing Laterality Tasks
Free viewing (non-fixation controlled), unspeeded laterality paradigms such as the line bisection task, the landmark task and the greyscales task have been shown via meta-analysis to differentiate between healthy samples (which display the typical leftward bias/pseudoneglect) and disorders presenting with atypical visuospatial attention asymmetry such as schizophrenia and unilateral spatial neglect (Jewell & McCourt, 2000; Voyer et al., 2012). Line bisection tasks, where participants view horizontal lines and are asked to manually bisect them, were originally used as a clinical measure of spatial neglect but have since been used to detect pseudoneglect in healthy samples (Jewell & McCourt, 2000). Samples of healthy participants will typically show a small but statistically significant bisection error to the left of the centre of the line indicating a slight leftward attention bias such that the rightward extent of the horizontal line is underestimated.  This paradigm has only moderate test-retest reliability (Pierce, Jewell, & Mennemeier, 2003) and is unable to rule out biases introduced by the motor system owing to the manual line bisection (Jewell & McCourt, 2000). The need for manual line bisection is eliminated in the landmark task (Milner, Brechmann, & Pagliarini, 1992), where participants are shown pre-bisected horizontal lines with bisection offset either slightly towards the left/right or positioned in the centre. Participants are required to indicate which side of the pre-bisected horizontal line they think is the shortest. Again healthy participants tend to err towards perceiving the right side of the line as shorter indicating pseudoneglect or a leftward bias/asymmetry of spatial attention. 
A body of research indicates that the length of the horizontal line in the line bisection and landmark tasks modulates the bias, with leftward bias increasing as a function of horizontal length (Benwell, Harvey, Gardner, & Thut, 2012; Heber, Siebertz, Wolter, Kuhlen, & Fimm, 2010; McCourt & Jewell, 1999; Rueckert, Deravanesian, Baboorian, Lacalamita, & Repplinger, 2002; Thomas, Loetscher, & Nicholls, 2012). Interestingly, this horizontal line-length effect on spatial bias is independent of state factors such as time-on-task (Benwell et al., 2012). The effect of time-on-task and alertness on spatial attention asymmetry is discussed below.
Free viewing laterality tasks typically note large individual differences in the direction and extent of spatial asymmetry amongst participants (Bowers & Heilman, 1980; Cowie & Hamill, 1997; Halligan, Manning, & Marshall, 1990; Manning, Halligan, & Marshall, 1990; McCourt & Olafson, 1997; Tomer, 2008) reflecting the fact that pseudoneglect is a population level phenomenon only reliably detected when averaging across healthy samples. Although most studies show significant leftward bias/pseudoneglect and two meta-analyses have confirmed the effect (Jewell & McCourt, 2000; Voyer et al., 2012), a handful of studies with small sample sizes have shown the opposite results (Butter & Kirsch, 1992; Schenkenberg, Bradford, & Ajax, 1980; Szczepanski & Kastner, 2013), due to large interindividual variability and perhaps also state factors, such as alertness, that moderate spatial bias, and which are discussed below.
Learmonth, et al. (2015) recently asked 55 right-handed healthy young adults to perform test-retest sessions on five spatial attention tasks (including both divided visual field and free-viewing laterality tasks) across two different days. All measures of spatial attention bias were found to be stable over the two testing sessions, indicating good test-retest reliability. However, the measures showed poor inter-task correlations, indicating that the different tasks may be measuring different aspects of spatial attention bias.  Principal component analysis showed that variation in the measures grouped into four main visuospatial asymmetry components: size judgements (manual line bisection and landmark), stimulus detection (lateralised visual detection), judgements of global/local features (manual line bisection and grating scales) and luminance judgements (greyscales task). This supports the idea that visuospatial attention bias may be made up of a number of separate asymmetries for different visual stimulus features (Learmonth, Gallagher, Gibson, Thut, & Harvey, 2015). These findings are in line with the suggestion that visuospatial bias can be contributed to by both asymmetries in processing spatial properties of individual objects and asymmetries in processing egocentric space (Nicholls, Hughes, Mattingley, & Bradshaw, 2004; Orr & Nicholls, 2005; Post, Caufield, & Welch, 2001; Schumann, Buonocore, & Amaral, 2001).
Interestingly, despite these separate components contributing to visuospatial attention bias, both state and trait moderators of visuospatial attention bias, such as alertness (state) and hemispheric white matter asymmetry (trait) have been shown to moderate bias on both free viewing laterality tasks and fixation controlled divided visual field tasks (Dodds et al., 2008; Manly, Dobler, Dodds, & George, 2005; Newman et al., 2013; Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2011). Nonetheless, to ensure measurement of a consistent component of visuospatial attention asymmetry, lateralised visual detection tasks that capitalise on divided visual field methodology were used to measure of spatial attention asymmetry throughout this thesis.  

 Right hemisphere dominance  versus  interhemispheric competition  accounts of visuospatial asymmetry
Some theories have proposed a right hemisphere dominance for spatial attention to explain spatial attention asymmetries such as pseudoneglect and unilateral spatial neglect (Heilman, Bowers, & Coslett, 1985; Mesulam, 1981). For example, Mesulam (1981) proposes that the right hemisphere directs attention to both hemifields, whereas the left hemisphere only directs attention to the right hemifield. On the other hand,  interhemispheric competition models  (Kinsbourne, 1977, 1993; Szczepanski & Kastner, 2013) propose that spatial bias is controlled through competitive interactions between hemispheres rather than a dominant right hemisphere. 
Neuroimaging and TMS studies suggest that both the left and right dorsal fronto-parietal networks direct attention predominantly to the contralateral visual field and are symmetrically, rather than asymmetrically, organized (Capotosto, Babiloni, Romani, & Corbetta, 2012; Corbetta, Kincade, Ollinger, McAvoy, & Shulman, 2000; Hopfinger, Buonocore, & Mangun, 2000; Kastner, Pinsk, De Weerd, Desimone, & Ungerleider, 1999; Shulman et al., 2010; Szczepanski & Kastner, 2013; Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2011).  Both left and right hemisphere posterior parietal cortex contain retinotopic maps of contralateral space (Sereno, Pitzalis, & Martinez, 2001; Silver & Kastner, 2009). A gradient of relative hemispheric activation asymmetry in preparatory brain activity is the best predictor of the locus of attention in space, rather than activity from one hemisphere only (Bisley & Goldberg, 2003; Siegel, Donner, Oostenveld, Fries, & Engel, 2008; Sylvester, Shulman, Jack, & Corbetta, 2007). Further, top-down influences on asymmetries of visual cortex activity during spatial attention orienting originate from both the left and right hemisphere (Bressler, Tang, Sylvester, Shulman, & Corbetta, 2008).
Despite these findings, there is overwhelming evidence that attention functions are lateralised to the right hemisphere (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011; Husain & Rorden, 2003), and also that the right hemisphere plays a dominant role in visuospatial processing. For example, split-brain patients show a clear right hemisphere advantage for processing spatial information (Bogen & Gazzaniga, 1965; Corballis, Funnell, & Gazzaniga, 2002; Funnell, Corballis, & Gazzaniga, 1999), and tasks that tax non-spatial attention capacity asymmetrically engage right hemisphere ventral attention network regions (Adler et al., 2001; Coull & Frith, 1998; Foucher, Otzenberger, & Gounot, 2004; H ger et al., 1998; Johannsen et al., 1997; Pardo, Fox, & Raichle, 1991; Paus et al., 1997; Sturm et al., 1999, 2004). Furthermore, unilateral spatial neglect is most commonly associated with lesions to the right ventral attention network leading to a secondary disruption of structurally undamaged bilateral dorsal regions (Corbetta, Kincade, Lewis, Snyder, & Sapir, 2005). Accordingly, Corbetta and Shulman (2011) argue that in the case of neglect, damage to the right lateralised ventral alertness network results in abnormal ventral-to-dorsal network interaction in the right hemisphere, producing an inter-hemispheric activation imbalance of the bilateral dorsal networks which control top-down attention orienting. In healthy participants, decreased alertness leads to decreased activation of the right hemisphere lateralised ventral attention network (Paus et al., 1997; Sturm & Willmes, 2001), which may have a knock-on effect for the dorsal orienting network. Chapters 2 and 4 directly investigate the effect of alertness on both behavioural measures of visuospatial attention asymmetry and EEG measures of hemispheric activation asymmetry.

Alertness and visuospatial asymmetry
Recent evidence indicates that spatial bias can be influenced by non-spatial attention processes, such as alertness and non-lateralised attention load.  For example, the debilitating inattention of left space observed in patients suffering from unilateral spatial neglect subsequent to right-hemisphere damage can be temporarily overcome by phasic alerting tones (Kathrin Finke et al., 2012; Robertson, Mattingley, Rorden, & Driver, 1998). The relationship between alertness and spatial bias is also seen in healthy participants. Manly, Dobler, Dodds and George (2005) asked healthy participants to complete a free-viewing version of the landmark task when alert and after sleep deprivation.  When alert, participants displayed pseudoneglect, but displayed a rightward shift in attention after sleep deprivation.  A subtle rightward shift was also observed as the task progressed (Manly et al., 2005). Following this, Dufour, Touzalin and Candas (2007), and Dodds et al. (2008) documented rightward shifts in attention with time on fixation controlled measures of spatial bias.  They argued this rightward attention drift may be underpinned by decreased arousal with time-on-task.  Indeed, the rightward shift in spatial bias with time-on-task was abolished by the psychostimulant modafinil which increases alertness but not by placebo (Dodds, M ller, & Manly, 2009), further indicating a link between alertness and spatial bias. This link between decreased alertness and a rightward shift in visuospatial attention bias has since been replicated using a number of different behavioural paradigms (Benwell et al., 2012; Heber, Valvoda, Kuhlen, & Fimm, 2008; Matthias et al., 2010). The rightward shift in spatial attention bias with decreased alertness is also observed in the auditory domain. Bareham and colleagues observed a pronounced auditory inattention to left space during drowsy periods prior to sleep onset (Bareham, Manly, Pustovaya, Scott, & Bekinschtein, 2014).
Despite many studies documenting a link between alertness and behavioural measures of visuospatial bias, little is known about the neural correlates of this relationship. Chapter 2 of this thesis addresses this gap in the literature using EEG to show that there is a link between time-on-task, spatial bias and hemispheric activation asymmetry.  
Chapter 4 of this thesis then capitalises on the alerting effects of blue-enriched light to directly manipulate alertness in healthy participants and further explore the effect of alertness on spatial attention asymmetry. A non-rod/non-cone photoreceptor system primarily mediates the (non-visual) alerting effects of light, via a subset of intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) that contain the novel photopigment melanopsin and are maximally sensitive to blue light (~480nm) (Brainard & Hanifin, 2005; Schmidt, Chen, & Hattar, 2011). This system has a different spectral sensitivity to the  classic  rod and cone photoreceptor systems that are responsible for night-time and day-time vision, respectively, and which are maximally sensitive to green light (~555nm) (Vandewalle, Maquet, & Dijk, 2009). The ipRGCs are present at low densities throughout the entire retina and provide a widespread but relatively low sensitivity light detector to inform brain regions that are not involved in the visual system of the presence or absence of light. One line of evidence for the role of ipRGCs in modulating non-visual functions is based on the observation that non-visual effects are apparent in totally blind individuals (Gooley et al., 2012; Vandewalle et al., 2013), and sighted individuals show short-wavelength sensitivity to the alerting and circadian resetting effects of light when light exposures are controlled for photon density (Rahman et al., 2014). Studies involving day-time fMRI (Vandewalle et al., 2006) and night-time PET (Perrin et al., 2004) have previously demonstrated that blue light disproportionately activates key right-hemisphere regions related to attention. This led to the hypothesis that is tested in Chapter 4 regarding whether exposure to higher, relative to lower, intensities of blue-enriched white light, could promote attention to the left visual hemi-field by enhancing alertness and activation of right hemisphere attention networks.

Non-spatial attention and visuospatial asymmetry
Evidence suggests that those who score more poorly on measures of sustained attention ability have greater rightward bias (i.e. leftward inattention) on spatial attention tasks (Bellgrove, Dockree, Aimola, & Robertson, 2004; Dobler et al., 2005). Poynter, Ingram and Minor, (2010), found that greater self-reported attention problems are related to deficits in orienting spatial attention to the left hemifield. Furthermore, sustained attention for auditory stimuli predicts the severity of spatial bias in neglect patients (Robertson et al., 1997). Such patients with disorders of attention are particularly vulnerable to leftward inattention caused by increasing load on non-spatial attention via a dual-task (Bellgrove et al., 2013; Peers, Cusack, & Duncan, 2006; van Kessel, van Nes, Brouwer, Geurts, & Fasotti, 2010; Marlies E van Kessel, Van Nes, Geurts, Brouwer, & Fasotti, 2013). This effect has proven harder to induce in healthy participants, but a number of studies show evidence for an asymmetric decrease in attention to left space caused by increasing non-spatial attention load (O Connell, Schneider, Hester, Mattingley, & Bellgrove, 2011; Peers et al., 2006; P rez et al., 2009). For example, Peers et al. (2006) asked patients with right parietal lesions as well as patients with left parietal lesions to complete a spatial attention task whilst manipulating non-spatial attention load via the addition of a concurrent auditory task.  The dual task condition elicited a rightward shift in perceptual bias in both left parietal and right parietal patients. These data suggest that non-spatial factors modulate the allocation of spatial attention.  These behavioural results may be related to evidence that tasks taxing non-spatial attention asymmetrically engage right hemisphere ventral attention network regions, specifically the inferior parietal lobule (IPL) and the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) (Adler et al., 2001; Coull & Frith, 1998; Foucher et al., 2004; H ger et al., 1998; Johannsen et al., 1997; Pardo et al., 1991; Paus et al., 1997; Sturm et al., 1999, 2004). This is consistent with our emergent understanding of the interaction between the right lateralised ventral attention network and the bilateral dorsal attention network.  Specifically, modulations of the ventral attention network via manipulations of alertness, arousal and/or attentional capacity may modulate activity within the dorsal orienting network driving attention rightwards (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011). 

Dopamine and visuospatial asymmetry
Consistent with animal studies that report spatial inattention after ascending dopaminergic pathways lesions (Iversen, 1984), dopamine agonists reduce the extent of spatial inattention in patients with unilateral spatial neglect (Fleet, Valenstein, Watson, & Heilman, 1987; Gorgoraptis et al., 2012).  Slagter, Davidson and Tomer (2010) reported that visuospatial bias measured using a free-viewing perceptual task (the Greyscales Task) in healthy participants was related to spontaneous eye blink rate, a putative marker of striatal dopaminergic activity. Tomer et al. (2012) provided direct evidence for this relationship in healthy adult participants where visuospatial bias correlated with asymmetric binding of dopamine D2 receptors in the striatum, such that spatial bias was directed contralaterally to the hemisphere with higher D2 receptor binding. A small number of studies found associations between DNA polymorphisms of the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) and  asymmetries of spatial attention (Bellgrove et al., 2005, 2007, 2009; Bellgrove et al., 2008; Newman, O Connell, Nathan, & Bellgrove, 2012; Zozulinsky et al., 2014).  In vitro and human in vivo experiments suggest the 10-repeat allele of a variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism within the 3  untranslated region of DAT1 is associated with increased expression of the transporter which could reduce available synaptic dopamine (Brookes et al., 2006, 2007; Cheon, Ryu, Kim, & Cho, 2005; Fuke et al., 2001; Heinz et al., 2000; VanNess, Owens, & Kilts, 2005).  Allelic variation within both this VNTR, and an intron 8 VNTR, has been associated with asymmetries of selective attention in children with and without ADHD (Bellgrove et al., 2007, 2009).  Although we previously reported an influence of the DAT1 3 UTR VNTR on lateralised target detections in non-clinical adults (Newman et al., 2012), participants were not required to select a target from amongst competing distractors, making it unclear whether the results merely reflect an asymmetry of response selection rather than a specific asymmetry of attentional selection. Chapter 5 of this thesis attempts to adjudicate between roles for dopamine in attentional versus response selection, employing three different paradigms with varying requirements for resolving attentional competition versus response competition.

Other putative moderators of visuospatial asymmetry
Peripersonal/ extrapersonal space and visuospatial bias
Visuospatial attention asymmetry has been reported to change depending on whether the visual stimulus is in the upper or lower visual field, and it is thought that these effects may be related to the distinction between near (peripersonal) and far (extrapersonal) space in the brain (Previc, 2011). Studies have observed a greater leftward bias for stimuli falling in peripersonal space (Longo & Lourenco, 2006; McCourt & Garlinghouse, 2000; McCourt & Jewell, 1999) and a rightward shift for stimuli appearing in extrapersonal space (Cowey, Small, & Ellis, 1994; Longo & Lourenco, 2006; Nicholls et al., 2011). However results have been inconsistent (Barrett, Crosson, Crucian, & Heilman, 2000; Drago, Crucian, Pisani, & Heilman, 2006; Loughnane, Shanley, Lalor, & O Connell, 2015; McCourt & Garlinghouse, 2000; Nicholls et al., 2012; Thomas & Elias, 2010). The effect of peri- versus extrapersonal space is not a focus of this thesis, which will employ visuospatial attention tasks with stimuli in peripersonal space only. Nonetheless, the experiment detailed in Chapter 4 included stimuli in both the upper and lower vertical visual field and found no effect of vertical visual field on spatial asymmetry. 
The effect of age and handedness on visuospatial asymmetry
Research shows that the typical leftward visuospatial attention asymmetry shifts rightward with age, perhaps due to lower levels of alertness with aging leading to a reduction in right hemisphere dominance for attentional processing in elderly populations (Benwell, Thut, Grant, & Harvey, 2014; Chen et al., 2011; Failla, Sheppard, & Bradshaw, 2003; Schmitz & Peigneux, 2011). Handedness is another factor that has a subtle effect on visuospatial attention asymmetry (Voyer et al., 2012). A meta analyses of studies using free viewing measures of spatial attention bias  (Voyer et al., 2012) showed that although left-handers have significantly less leftward bias than right-handers, there was still evidence for a subtle leftward spatial attention bias in the left-handed population. All studies in this thesis focus on right-handed healthy participants between 18 and 45 year of age.  
Reading habits, language processing and visuospatial asymmetry
While reading habits (i.e. reading from left to right vs. right to left vs. up/down ) may have a subtle environmental influence on spatial attention bias, a number of cross-cultural behavioural studies report leftward spatial attention bias, at the population level, regardless of reading habits (Megreya & Havard, 2011; Nicholls & Roberts, 2002; Smigasiewicz et al., 2010; Vaid & Singh, 1989). 
Although most people possess left hemisphere lateralised language processing, the direction and extent of language lateralisation also varies between individuals (Knecht, Dr ger, et al., 2000). For example, a number of studies have confirmed that more strongly right-handed participants are likely to have greater left-hemisphere lateralised language processing  (Isaacs, Barr, Nelson, & Devinsky, 2006; Knecht, Deppe, et al., 2000; Pujol, Deus, Losilla, & Capdevila, 1999). In a sample of 188 healthy right handed participants Knecht, Deppe, et al., (2000) found ~7.5% had atypical right hemisphere dominance for language (Knecht, Deppe, et al., 2000). Like hemispheric language lateralisation, a leftward spatial attention bias is evident when data are averaged across samples of healthy participants under normal alert conditions, but considerable variation in the direction and extent of visuospatial bias exists between individuals and is influenced by a number of traits including handedness, and personality traits including novelty seeking and approach and avoidance behaviours (Garner et al., 2012; Tomer, 2008).  This suggests that visuospatial bias and hemispheric lateralisation of attention functions might partly reflect a trait-like phenomenon that varies in the normal population.  Cai et al. (2013) found evidence for complementary hemispheric specialization for language and visuospatial attention i.e. those people with more left hemisphere-lateralised language processing also had more right hemisphere-lateralised visuospatial processing in healthy participants. However some studies have found no relationship between lateralisation for language and visuospatial processing (Rosch, Bishop, & Badcock, 2012; Whitehouse & Bishop, 2009). The hypothesis that spatial attention asymmetry is a trait-like phenomenon is complicated by the fact that spatial attention asymmetry is clearly influenced by state factors like alertness. Still, the relationship between hemispheric asymmetry in frontal-parietal white matter tracts and visuospatial attention asymmetry lends some support to the notion of spatial attention asymmetry as a relatively stable, trait-like phenomenon. 
White Matter asymmetries and visuospatial asymmetry
Thiebaut De Schotten et al. (2005) used subcortical brain stimulation and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) in neurosurgery patients to show that communication is required between frontal and parietal regions of the cortex for symmetric spatial attention allocation. They also showed that unilateral spatial neglect can be caused by the disruption of communication along a bundle of white matter tracts called the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), which connects the frontal and parietal lobes. This effect was specific to the medial branch of the SLF (SLF II) which connects the dorsal branch (SLF I) and the ventral branch (SLF III). Thiebaut de Schotten et al. (2011) then used a free viewing and a fixation controlled measure of spatial attention bias along with DTI in healthy participants to show that asymmetry in the volume of SLF II predicted the direction and extent of spatial attention bias. Participants who had greater SLF II volume in the right hemisphere than in the left hemisphere (the majority of participants) tended to show more leftward spatial attention bias (typical of pseudoneglect), whereas participants who showed less SLF II volume in the right than left hemisphere tended to show the opposite spatial attention bias.  This finding was recently replicated using a different measure of visuospatial attention bias, based on TVA (Chechlacz, Gillebert, Vangkilde, Petersen, & Humphreys, 2015). Marshal and colleagues found that participants with greater SLF1 volume in the right hemisphere compared to the left hemisphere tended to have better ability to modulate right compared to left hemisphere pre-target alpha and gamma band de/synchronization in response to spatial cues (Marshall, Bergmann, & Jensen, 2015).  Hemispheric asymmetry in pre-target alpha power and its relationship to visuospatial attention bias is examined in Chapters 2 and 4 of this thesis, and a brief introduction is offered below.

Alpha ( ) power and visuospatial asymmetry
Previous EEG work shows an inverse relationship between spectral power in the   band (8-14Hz) over posterior scalp sites and forthcoming behavioral performance on both spatial and nonspatial attention tasks (Capilla, Schoffelen, Paterson, Thut, & Gross, 2012; Ergenoglu et al., 2004; Hanslmayr et al., 2007; Kelly, Gomez-Ramirez, & Foxe, 2009; Kelly & O Connell, 2013; O Connell et al., 2009; Van Dijk, Schoffelen, Oostenveld, & Jensen, 2008; Yamagishi, Callan, Anderson, & Kawato, 2008). In the context of visuospatial attention, visual cortex oscillatory synchronization reflects neural excitation/inhibition in retinotopically selective manner, and is thought to be a mechanism for visual attention/suppression of certain spatial locations (Engel, Fries, & Singer, 2001; Fries, 2005). Greater posterior   power reflects active inhibition of task-irrelevant neural populations, while less posterior   power is thought to reflect  cortical readiness  for processing external stimuli (Pfurtscheller, 2001; Romei, Rihs, Brodbeck, & Thut, 2008; Romei, Brodbeck, et al., 2008; Sadaghiani et al., 2010). For example, covertly allocating visual attention to a location where a target is likely to appear causes relatively greater   power over posterior regions ipsilateral to the attended area (inhibition of task-irrelevant brain regions) and a relative reduction in   activity over contralateral regions representing the attended spatial location (enhancement of task-relevant regions) (Capotosto et al., 2012; Foxe, Simpson, & Ahlfors, 1998; Fu et al., 2001; Kelly, Lalor, Reilly, & Foxe, 2006; Rihs, Michel, & Thut, 2007; Thut, Nietzel, Brandt, & Pascual-Leone, 2006; Worden, Foxe, Wang, & Simpson, 2000). The balance of   power asymmetry between left and right hemisphere parieto-occipital regions predicts the locus of attention between the left and right visual hemifield on a trial-by-trial basis (Thut et al., 2006). Interestingly similar changes in hemispheric   asymmetry are seen with shifts of auditory spatial attention (Banerjee, Snyder, Molholm, & Foxe, 2011), and dynamic causal modelling of EEG data shows a right hemisphere dominance for shifts of auditory spatial attention (Dietz, Friston, Mattingley, Roepstorff, & Garrido, 2014).
Combined EEG and TMS work (Romei, Gross, & Thut, 2010; Thut et al., 2011) suggests that pre-target posterior   may play a causal role in the manifestation of visuospatial attention bias.  Romei et al. found that lateralised TMS stimulation at  , but not theta or beta frequencies, selectively impaired detection of unilateral visual targets in the contralateral hemifield, and enhanced detection in the ipsilateral hemifield. It should be noted, however, that this relationship may depend on varying competition between task-relevant and irrelevant visual cortex regions in response to varying target location across the hemifields (Slagter, Prinssen, Reteig, & Mazaheri, 2015). Slagter et al. (2015) asked participants to continuously attend to only one hemifield where the visual stimuli were always presented. Interestingly pre-target   power was found to be relatively higher over the right posterior hemisphere regardless of whether the stimuli were in the left or the right hemifield.
Although right hemisphere lateralisation of some aspects of attention in humans is well established, it is not yet fully understood which attention functions (e.g. spatial vs. sustained attention) are lateralised or how this is reflected in EEG  -band activity. Capotosto et al. (2012) used a spatial cueing task with EEG and applied repetitive TMS during the cue-to-target interval to disrupt the intraparietal sulcus (IPS) of the left or right hemisphere in order to test if the influence of the IPS on pre-target   power was asymmetrically organized between the hemispheres. Although TMS disruption of both the left or right IPS changed the relative asymmetry of   power between the hemispheres in the expected direction, only TMS interference to the right, but not left, IPS induced an overall increase in pre-target   power over bilateral occipital regions (instead of the typical   desynchronization during the cue-to-target interval) along with a bilateral deficit in target detection accuracy. Interestingly, this abnormal   synchronization after right hemisphere IPS disruption was specific to the  -band, and did not extend to beta or gamma frequencies. These results suggest that although both hemispheres contribute to the typical change in  -asymmetry when shifting spatial attention, a hemispheric specialisation exists such that the right IPS asymmetrically contributes to a bilateral (non-spatial) activation of the occipital cortex (Capotosto et al., 2012). This result is qualitatively similar to that found by Ruff et al. using combined TMS/fMRI where stimulation of right, but not left, IPS caused bilateral blood-oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) contrast changes in both left and right occipital lobes (Ruff et al., 2008, 2009). That the right IPS plays a dominant role in controlling the non-spatial excitability of the visual cortex is consistent with Corbetta and Shulman s (2011) model outlining the relationship between the right hemisphere lateralised ventral attention network and the bilateral dorsal attention network which controls top-down orienting of attention.

RESEARCH AIMS
Broadly, this thesis aims to further understand the biological drivers of visuospatial attentional asymmetry in neurological healthy subjects. More specifically, this thesis aims to understand the impact of the state factors alertness and non-spatial attention load, and the trait factors dopamine transporter genotype and observer subtypes on visuospatial bias. Experimental chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this thesis explore the effect of alertness on both behavioural measures of visuospatial attention asymmetry and hemisphere asymmetry in the alpha-band using EEG. Experimental chapters 3 and 5 consider the hypothesis of trait factors (namely dopamine transporter genotype, and observer subtypes for time-on-task shifts in spatial bias) influencing behavioural measures of visuospatial attention asymmetry. The findings of this thesis converge to show that both alertness (state) and dopamine genotype (trait) factors independently influence visuospatial attention bias. 











CHAPTER 2: ALERTNESS AS A STATE MODULATOR OF VISUOSPATIAL ATTENTION ASYMMETRY
 
Declaration for Thesis Chapter 2
Declaration by candidate
In the case of Chapter 2, the nature and extent of my contribution to the work was the following:
Nature of Contribution	Extent of 
contribution (%)
Literature review, hypothesis conception and analysis design (time-on-task analysis), recruitment and testing of participants, data processing, inferential data analysis, and manuscript write-up.	70%

The following co-authors contributed to the work. If co-authors are students at Monash University, the extent of their contribution in percentage terms must ne stated:
Name	Nature of Contribution	Extent of contribution (%) for student co-authors only
Dr. Redmond O Connell	Data processing and manuscript write-up.	
Prof. Mark Bellgrove	Project design and manuscript write-up.	
		
		
		
		
		

The undersigned hereby certify that the above declaration correctly reflects the nature and extent of the candidate s and co-authors  contribution to this work*
Candidate s
 Signature:	 	Date 21/01/2016

Main 
Supervisor s 
Signature 	 	Date 21/01/2016

*Note: Where the responsible author is not the candidate s main supervisor, the main supervisor should consult with the responsible author to agree on the respective contributions of the authors
 

Preamble to peer reviewed paper 1
Abnormal asymmetries of visuospatial attention are observed in a number of prominent clinical groups including unilateral spatial neglect, and ADHD, but more subtle asymmetries (known as  pseudoneglect ) are also observed in the general population.  Investigating the neural origins of this phenomenon can tell us much about the fundamental neural dynamics governing attention.  For example, a number of behavioural studies have demonstrated rightward shifts in visuospatial bias associated with time on repetitive tasks and increased demands on non-spatial attention.  A recent neuroanatomical model (Corbetta and Shulman, 2011) has proposed that these effects arise from interactions between the bilateral dorsal fronto-parietal spatial network, and a right lateralised  vigilance/alertness  network.  According to this view, increasing demands on non-spatial aspects of attention cause a depletion of right hemisphere processing resources, giving the left hemisphere a competitive advantage and producing a rightward shift in spatial attention.  Before the publication of the current chapter however, neurophysiological evidence for this claim had yet to be provided.
Thus, the peer reviewed paper comprising this chapter sought experimental evidence for this hypothesis in a sample of neurologically healthy participants.  We recorded EEG while participants made speeded responses to transient, unilateral visual targets while also performing a dual-task at fixation.  Posterior  -band activity, which has been associated with deactivation of the dorsal spatial attention network, was recorded in the interval before and after the onset of the lateral targets.  Asymmetry indices were derived for both reaction times to the unilateral targets and hemispheric differences in  -band activity, and analysed as a function of time-on-task.  In line with our expectations, behavioural data revealed a rightward shift in spatial bias over time.  Pre-target  -band activity also became more prominent over the right, relative to left, hemisphere as the task progressed.  Furthermore, this change in pre-target  -band asymmetry correlated with the rightward shift in spatial bias over time.  
This chapter was therefore the first study to link rightward attention drift over time with change in hemispheric activation asymmetry. These results not only provide neurophysiological evidence that spatial bias is balanced by rivalry between the left and right hemisphere, but suggest that this balance is sensitive to decreasing alertness with time-on-task.  The data in this chapter support the view that biases of spatial attention are integrated with non-spatial aspects of attention. 

Abstract
Biases of spatial attention may be moderated by non-spatial factors such as attentional load and time-on-task. Although these effects are thought to arise from depletion of right hemisphere processing resources, their neurophysiological bases have yet to be confirmed.  We recorded posterior  -band EEG - a marker of cortical excitability linked to spatial attention orienting - from 66 non-clinical participants who detected transient, unilateral visual targets while also monitoring stimuli at fixation.  Asymmetry indices were derived for both lateral target reaction times and hemispheric differences in  -activity before and after lateral target onsets.  Pre-target   became more prominent over the right, relative to left, hemisphere as the task progressed over 48-min, and this change was correlated with a significant rightward shift in spatial bias. Contrary to past studies of posterior  -asymmetry and orienting, here participants did not receive pre-target cues. Thus we show that asymmetries in the hemispheric distribution of anticipatory   are not only apparent during externally-cued attention orienting, but are also sensitive to decreasing alertness over time.  These data are the first to link rightward attention drift over time with change in hemispheric activation asymmetry, providing important implications for our understanding of interacting spatial attention and non-spatial alertness networks.
 
INTRODUCTION
Healthy subjects tend to exhibit a subtle bias of visual attention favouring left space, termed  pseudoneglect , which occurs for a variety of stimuli (Nicholls, Bradshaw, & Mattingley, 1999; Voyer, Voyer, & Tramonte, 2012) and is thought to reflect the right hemisphere s dominance of the networks governing spatial attention (Loftus & Nicholls, 2012; Mesulam, 1981).  Recent research with healthy volunteers and patient groups exhibiting pathological visuo-spatial asymmetries suggest that spatial biases are regulated by non-spatial factors, such as attentional load and time-on-task (Dodds et al., 2008; Matthias et al., 2009; Peers, Cusack, & Duncan, 2006).  Despite our increasing knowledge of the cognitive factors that might modulate spatial biases, our knowledge of the physiological bases of these effects remains unclear.  Here we employed electrophysiology to understand the influence of attentional load and time-on-task on neural biases of spatial attention in healthy volunteers.  

A number of lines of evidence suggest that non-spatial factors modulate biases of spatial attention.  First, the modulatory influence of non-spatial processes on spatial bias has been documented in unilateral spatial neglect (hereafter  neglect ), a common outcome of right hemisphere damage that is characterised by pronounced deficits in attending to contralesional stimuli despite adequate sensory processing (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011; Husain & Nachev, 2007; Husain & Rorden, 2003).  Robertson et al. (1998) found that loud tones designed to increase alertness could temporarily reduce symptoms of leftward inattention in neglect patients (see also George et al., 2008).  Peers et al. (2006) also demonstrated that imposing a non-spatial dual-task during a spatial attention task caused the same general rightward shift in patients with left neglect, patients with right neglect and control participants.  Furthermore, it has been shown that neglect can be temporarily ameliorated by psychostimulants but exacerbated by sedatives, suggesting a critical modulatory influence of arousal (Fleet, Valenstein, Watson, & Heilman, 1987; Geminiani, Bottini, & Sterzi, 1998; Grujic et al., 1998; Lazar et al., 2002; Malhotra, Parton, Greenwood, & Husain, 2006; Mukand et al., 2001).  

Second, a number of studies have shown that even in healthy populations, spatial bias is significantly modulated by sleep deprivation (Manly, Dobler, Dodds, & George, 2005), non-spatial attentional load (Peers, et al., 2006; P rez et al., 2009), diminishing alertness with time-on-task (Dodds, et al., 2008; Dufour, Touzalin, & Candas, 2007) and psychostimulants (Dodds, M ller, & Manly, 2009).  The links between non-spatial attention processes and spatial bias in both clinical and non-clinical populations highlight a need to understand how these mechanisms are integrated in the human brain.

At a neural level, it has been proposed (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011) that the effects of alertness and attentional load on spatial bias result from increased demand on a right lateralised ventral attention network (Coull, Frackowiak, & Frith, 1998; Pardo, Fox, & Raichle, 1991; Sturm et al., 1999; Sturm et al., 2004) that regulates inter-hemispheric rivalry in the bilateral dorsal orienting network (Corbetta, Patel, & Shulman, 2008; Corbetta & Shulman, 2011; Husain & Nachev, 2007).  The bilateral orienting network is activated by selectively attending to stimuli across space and linking them to appropriate responses, whilst the right lateralised ventral attention network has been linked to non-spatial attention capacity (Culham, Cavanagh, & Kanwisher, 2001; Schwartz et al., 2005; Vuilleumier et al., 2008)  and vigilance/alertness (Paus et al., 1997; Sturm & Willmes, 2001). Decreased activation within the right lateralised ventral network may cause a more global decrease in right hemisphere activation, giving the left dorsal orienting network a competitive activation advantage over the right dorsal network, thus driving attention rightwards (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011).

Support for the above neuroanatomical model comes from an fMRI study of neglect patients with damage restricted to the right ventral attention network whose rightward spatial bias was associated with a functional imbalance in the structurally intact dorsal orienting network (Corbetta, Kincade, Lewis, Snyder, & Sapir, 2005). A recent diffusion imaging study (De Schotten et al., 2011) provides a neuronatomical basis for the pseudoneglect of healthy individuals by demonstrating a clear right lateralisation in tracts connecting the dorsal and ventral networks which was strongly related to the degree of pseudoneglect displayed by participants. To date however, a neurophysiological marker that is sensitive to interactions between spatial and non-spatial attention systems has yet to be identified.

In the present study we tested the hypothesis that a rightward attentional shift with time-on-task and attentional load is linked to changing hemispheric activation asymmetry.  We recorded continuous EEG from healthy participants during a fixation-controlled spatial attention task that allowed us to separately manipulate attentional load and time-on-task. Participants detected sudden onset targets that occurred at uncued peripheral locations while performing a concurrent task at fixation.  Demand on non-spatial attention was manipulated across three levels (no, low and high central load) by changing the difficulty of the task at fixation, and changes in behavioural and neurophysiological markers of spatial attention were analysed as a function of time-on-task.  We capitalized on hemispheric asymmetry in  -band (8   14 Hz) as a marker of cortical activation asymmetry before and after the onset of a peripheral event. Decreased  -band activity reflects increased cortical activation or excitability, whereas increased   activity reflects cortical deactivation (Pfurtscheller, 2001; Romei et al., 2008; Romei, Rihs, Brodbeck, & Thut, 2008; Sadaghiani et al., 2010). Several recent studies employing simultaneous EEG and fMRI have demonstrated that  -band activity is negatively correlated with activity of the dorsal attention network (Laufs et al., 2006; Laufs et al., 2003; Mantini, Perrucci, Del Gratta, Romani, & Corbetta, 2007; Sadaghiani, et al., 2010; Scheeringa et al., 2009). 

Thut et al. (2006) measured   activity over the parieto-occipital cortex during a variant of the Posner spatial cueing task (Posner, Walker, Friedrich, & Rafal, 1984) and found that preparatory hemispheric   asymmetry (expressed as a lateralisation index) during the epoch between spatial cue and target onset predicted reaction-time asymmetries for imminent peripheral targets.  Spatial cueing promotes desynchronization of   (decreased   activity) at contralateral parieto-occipital sites, reflecting facilitated processing at the locus of attention (Kelly, Gomez-Ramirez, & Foxe, 2009; Rihs, Michel, & Thut, 2009; Sauseng et al., 2005; Thut, Nietzel, Brandt, & Pascual-Leone, 2006; Yamagishi, Goda, Callan, Anderson, & Kawato, 2005) whereas synchronization (increased   activity) over ipsilateral sites, may index suppression of unattended space (Kelly, Lalor, Reilly, & Foxe, 2006; Rihs, Michel, & Thut, 2007; Rihs, et al., 2009; Worden, Foxe, Wang, & Simpson, 2000).  These cueing studies explicitly directed the attention of participants in the pre-target interval to one or the other hemifield.  In the current study, by contrast, we presented targets at uncued lateral locations, eliminating any strategic top-down biasing of attention. This allowed us to investigate the impact of depleting non-spatial attention resources- either via central task load or time-on-task- on both the balance of   power between the two hemispheres and corresponding visuospatial bias.  We predicted that depleting non-spatial attention resources via time-on-task and central task load would lead to a rightward shift in posterior  -asymmetry and spatial bias. 
METHOD
Participants 
Data were collected from 91 right-handed volunteers of Caucasian descent, reporting normal or corrected to normal vision, no history of neurological or psychiatric disorder and no head injury resulting in loss of consciousness. Event-related potential (O'Connell, Schneider, Hester, Mattingley, & Bellgrove, 2011) and molecular genetics (Newman, O'Connell, Nathan, & Bellgrove, 2012) data from a subset of these participants were previously published, however no analyses of   activity were conducted. All participants gave written informed consent, and all procedures were in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Four participants responded to fewer than 75% of peripheral targets, suggesting they were insufficiently engaged in the task.  These participants were excluded from further analysis. Two were excluded due to a technical error relating to response acquisition. Three participants lacked full time-on-task data within each load condition, so could not be included, and sixteen participants displayed small but systematic eye movements during trials (see procedure below) and were thus excluded (Lins, Picton, Berg, & Scherg, 1993). This exclusion of participants due to systematic eye movements was necessary to ensure that peripheral stimuli were transmitted to contralateral visual cortex and that the key changes in alpha and behavioural bias could not be accounted for by systematic biases in eye movements.  This left a final sample of 66 participants (40 female) aged 18 to 47 (M = 24). 
Visual attention task  
Full details of the current task are presented in O Connell et al. (2011).  Briefly, the task comprised short (3600 ms) rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) streams of eight central alphanumeric characters on which participants fixated and monitored for the appearance of a target.  At the same time, participants covertly monitored left and right lateralised target locations to detect a sudden-onset unilateral peripheral stimulus (Fig. 1-A).  The peripheral stimulus appeared in either left or right target locations or not at all (catch trials).  These three trial types occurred in a randomised order and with equal probability. Participants indicated their detection of the peripheral target with a speeded button press with their right hand, with a valid response window of up to 1000 ms. Using a similar paradigm Peers et al. (2006) found response hand had no effect on spatial bias.  Peripheral stimuli appeared randomly at one of two time points in the RSVP stream: at 800 ms (simultaneous with the onset of the third character) or 2000 ms (simultaneous with the onset of the sixth character). After each trial, participants were questioned whether the central RSVP stream contained a target or not and answered by making a non-speeded two choice button press for  yes  or  no , before the next trial began. 

Attentional load at fixation was manipulated across three conditions (no, low, and high-load), completed in separate blocks in a counterbalanced order, by changing the task instructions to specify a different central target at the beginning of the condition.  For the no-load condition, participants were simply instructed to fixate on the central stream while also monitoring for a peripheral target and no central target was specified.  For the low-load condition, the specified central target was any green character   effectively a feature search (Treisman & Gelade, 1980).  For the high-load condition, the specified target was any red letter within the stream of red digits   effectively a conjunction search (Treisman & Gelade, 1980). Relatively greater attention was required in the high than low central-load condition because, in the former, the central target was defined by a conjunction of features that were shared by the non-target stimuli.  The central target appeared unpredictably in 50% of the trials and its order of appearance within the RSVP stream was randomised.  The onset of the central target never coincided with the onset of the peripheral target.




Fig. 1.  [A] Schematic of a single trial from the visual attention task. Participants fixated on the central stream searching for an assigned target, while simultaneously monitoring the periphery for a stimulus that could appear to the right or left or not at all (catch trials). Attentional load was manipulated across three central load conditions: high central load (red letter as central target), low central load (any green item as central target), and no central load (no central target). Participants indicated detection of the peripheral target with a speeded button press. Detection of the central target was assessed at the end of each trial. [B] Parieto-occipital ROIs showed the largest   desynchronisation in response to contralateral target stimuli.
Procedure
Participants were comfortably seated with their head supported by a chin rest 50 cm from the screen. They were instructed to maintain central fixation and avoid blinking or moving during each trial, but were encouraged to blink and move in the short breaks between each trial, if desired.  When participants had mastered a practice session of their first load condition, they were left alone in a darkened room to begin the task (described above).  Participants performed the three load conditions over one session.  Each load condition comprised 300 trials with participants receiving short rest periods after every 100 trials and at the end of each condition (note that these breaks were also included in O Connell et al. (2011) but omitted from the description of methods as time-on-task was not investigated in that study).  Before beginning a new load condition, participants read on-screen instructions and the experimenter explained the task verbally then ensured the participants  comprehension of the new task. Extended intervals between conditions for task instructions meant that it was not appropriate to analyse time-on-task across the whole testing session.  The duration of each load condition (approximately 48 minutes) ensured sufficient data for time-on-task analyses within each separate condition (see Dodds et al. (2008) for a similar approach).  
Data acquisition 
Continuous EEG was acquired using an Active Two Biosemi system with 64 scalp electrodes digitised at 512 Hz. Electro-oculogram (EOG) electrodes were placed above and below the left eye to measure vertical eye movements, and at the outer canthus of each eye for horizontal eye movements.  Processing was performed using the EEGLAB toolbox (Delorme & Makeig, 2004) in MATLAB. Behavioural data (reaction-time and accuracy) were acquired and processed using E-Prime 2.0 (Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA).

Following similar procedures to those of Thut et al (2006), analyses were conducted on two symmetric occipito-parietal regions of interest (ROI) defined based on grand-average waveforms (electrode sites showing largest alpha desynchronisation in response to contralateral target stimuli, see Fig. 1-B). Each ROI comprised five electrodes (left ROI: P7, P9, PO7, PO3, O1; right ROI: P8, P10, PO8, PO4, O2) which were pooled for all analyses. To ensure effects were not confounded by activation changes related to manual response preparation, a control analysis was achieved using lateralised motor-selective electrodes over the primary sensorimotor cortex (left hemisphere: C3, C5; right hemisphere: C4, C6) (Kaiser, Ulrich, & Lutzenberger, 2003; McFarland, Miner, Vaughan, & Wolpaw, 2000).
Electrophysiological artefact correction  
Offline electrophysiological data were average referenced and segmented into epochs of -2000 to +1000 ms relative to peripheral target onset. Only epochs for correctly detected targets were retained for analysis. To eliminate EOG and other artifactual transients, epochs were baseline corrected relative to the 100ms interval preceding target onset and any single trials with an amplitude deflection greater than 100  V were rejected. Two additional steps were taken to rule out the possible influence of horizontal eye movements. First, single trials were rejected if the bipolar horizontal EOG signal (left minus right) exceeded an absolute value of 60  V at any time within the epoch. Second, any participants who exhibited residual systematic eye movements in their grand-average bipolar horizontal EOG signal (>3  V amplitude deflection corresponding to 0.2 degrees change in eye position) (Lins, et al., 1993) were rejected from further analysis. This led to the rejection of 16 participants. 
Calculating  -band power
This study followed the criteria set out by Thut et al. (2006) for calculating the time course of  -band power during the pre and post-target intervals using a short time fourier transform (STFT).  For each of three time-blocks (first 100 trials, second 100 trials and last 100 trials) within each load condition, the epoched EEG data were band-pass filtered to isolate the  -frequency range, 8-14 Hz.  The data were then rectified (negative values made positive).  Initial -2000 to 1000 ms epochs were cropped to -1800 to 900 ms around the onset of peripheral targets to eliminate artefacts caused by band-pass filtering.  Data were then smoothed by averaging using a moving 100ms average window which stepped forward in 50 ms increments throughout each epoch.  The ROI data were then isolated into pre and post-target epochs and averaged across all single trials. Average post-target   was measured from 0 - 900 ms, while average pre-target   was measured from either -1450 to 0 ms (for peripheral targets appearing simultaneous with the onset of the sixth character), or from -550 to 0 ms (for peripheral targets appearing simultaneous with the onset of the third character). The shorter pre-target epoch (-550 to 0 ms) was necessary for targets appearing earlier in the trial to avoid recording changes in   related to trial onset. The resulting pre and post-target   measurements were entered into condition specific matrices for export into SPSS for final analysis. 
Analysis
Time-on-task was operationalised by dividing each level of load into 3 time blocks: first 100 trials, second 100 trials and final 100 trials.  Behavioural data were then filtered to accept trials where participants correctly detected the peripheral stimulus and correctly identified whether the central target was present or absent (for low and high-load conditions).  A measure of reaction time (RT) asymmetry was derived from peripheral RT (ms) using the following formula:
 
This index gives positive values when reaction-times are faster for right relative to the left targets (rightward spatial bias) and negative values when the opposite is true (leftward bias).  A similar formula was used to calculate hemispheric asymmetry for both pre and post-target parieto-occipital   activity:
 
This index gives positive values when   activity is greater over the right hemisphere ROI relative to the left hemisphere ROI and negative values when   activity is greater over the left hemisphere ROI relative to the right. If no asymmetry exists then the index gives a zero value (see Thut et al. (2006) for comparable use of asymmetry indices). The average post-target   asymmetry data were subjected to a time-on-task (first block vs. second block vs. final block)   load (no vs. low vs. high)   target side (left vs. right) repeated measures ANOVA (Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were employed where the assumption of sphericity was violated). Average RT and pre-target   asymmetry data were subjected to time-on-task (first block vs. second block vs. final block)   load (no vs. low vs. high) repeated measures ANOVAs.  Because we expected linear trends in RT and   asymmetry as a function of time-on-task, planned orthogonal polynomial contrasts were used where appropriate. The average asymmetry measures were also collapsed across load and time-on-task and subjected to one-sample t-tests from zero to gauge any overall asymmetry. 

The effect of pre-target   asymmetry on detection of forthcoming peripheral targets was also investigated at a trial-by-trial level. Each participant s single trials were sorted in ascending order from the trial containing the most negative pre-target alpha asymmetry through to the trial containing the most positive pre-target   asymmetry. The ordered single trials were then grouped into three equal sized bins; bin 1 comprising the third of trials in which pre-target   asymmetry was most negative, through to bin 3 comprising the third of trials in which pre-target   asymmetry was most positive. The corresponding absolute RT data (as opposed to the RT asymmetry index) for these trials were then analysed using an   asymmetry (bin 1 vs. bin 2 vs. bin 3)   target side (left vs. right) repeated measures ANOVA.
RESULTS
Behavioural Performance 
Participants detected both peripheral and central targets with near perfect accuracy (accuracy defined as correct hits; mean peripheral target accuracy 95%, mean central target accuracy 96%).  Peripheral target accuracy decreased as load increased ( = 98.60, p<.001). Wilcoxon signed-rank tests confirmed that mean accuracy was greater under no-load (99%) than low-load (95%; Z=-6.4, p<.001), which was in turn greater than high-load accuracy (92%; Z=-5.7, p<.001).  There was no change in peripheral target accuracy as a function of time-on-task ( = 1.21, p=.547).  In line with peripheral target accuracy, central target accuracy was higher under low-load (97%) than high-load (94%; Z=-6.6, p<.001), and did not change with time-on-task ( = .92, p=.630).

Peripheral target RT and   asymmetry indices were calculated to probe systematic differences in behavioural and hemispheric asymmetry as a function of central load and time-on-task.  For clarity however, we also present absolute peripheral target RT (Table 1) and absolute pre and post-target   power (Fig. 2-A) as a function of central load and time-on-task.  Absolute RTs slowed significantly with increased central load [F (2, 130) = 202.0, p < .001] but not with time-on-task [F (2, 130) = .724, p > .05].

Fig. 2.  [A] Pre and post-target  -band power as a function of time-on-task and central task load.  [B] Pre and post-target   asymmetry as a function of central task load.  [C] The time course of grand-average  -band oscillatory activity as a function of ROI, time-on-task (first block vs. final block) and peripheral target side.
Linking time-on-task, pre-target   asymmetry, and RT asymmetry
As can be seen from Fig 2-A and C, absolute   activity during the pre-target epoch increased as a function of time-on-task [F (1.67, 108.68) = 29.25, p < .001,  =.31].  However, the hemispheric   asymmetry index, rather than the absolute   magnitude, was the focus of the electrophysiological aspect of this study.  Pre-target   asymmetry and RT asymmetry data were first collapsed across central task load and time-on-task and subjected to one-sample t-tests to assess any asymmetry independent of load and time-on-task. Although overall pre-target   asymmetry was not significantly different from zero [t (65) = .59, p > .05], the analysis of overall RT asymmetry revealed a significant leftward bias that is characteristic of the phenomenon of pseudoneglect [M = -.011, SE = .004; t (65) = -2.74, p = .008].  

Pre-target   asymmetry and RT asymmetry data were then subjected to separate time-on-task   central task load repeated measures ANOVAs.  Planned orthogonal polynomial contrasts revealed a significant linear trend in pre-target   asymmetry with time-on-task [F (1, 65) = 9.41, p = .003,  =.13] showing that   activity became more prominent over the right hemisphere relative to the left hemisphere ROI with time (see Fig. 3-A). Crucially, a similar effect of time-on-task was observed for RT asymmetry. Planned orthogonal polynomial contrasts revealed a significant linear trend in RT asymmetry with time-on-task [F (1, 65) = 4.93, p = .030,  = .07], indicating a rightward shift in spatial bias over the course of the experiment (see Fig. 3-B).

To test for a link between the rightward shifts in spatial bias and hemispheric   asymmetry with time-on-task, data for RT asymmetry and pre-target   asymmetry were collapsed across load conditions and change measures were derived by subtracting the average asymmetry during the final 100 trials (the final block) from the average asymmetry during the first 100 trials (the first block).  The resulting indices of asymmetry change with time-on-task were examined with Pearson s correlations. A significant positive relationship between pre-target   asymmetry change and RT asymmetry change [r =.32, p =.010] revealed that participants who had a larger change in RT asymmetry with time-on-task also tended to have a larger change in pre-target   asymmetry, indicative of increasing   activity over of the right hemisphere relative to left hemisphere ROI with time-on-task. No significant relationship was observed between overall pre-target   asymmetry and RT asymmetry when time-on-task was disregarded.

Fig. 3.  [A] Increasing pre-target   asymmetry with time-on-task indicates that   activity became more prominent over the right parieto-occipital region, relative to the left, over time. [B] A leftward bias for RT that is characteristic of pseudoneglect is evident in the first block and is attenuated with time-on-task as spatial bias drifts rightward towards zero.  [C] RT asymmetry change with time-on-task as a function of change in pre-target   asymmetry with time-on-task. Participants with the greatest time-on-task shift in pre-target   asymmetry had a significantly greater shift in RT asymmetry. [D] The effect of pre-target   asymmetry on peripheral target RT (ms). RT s were significantly slower during the trials in which pre-target   asymmetry was most positive (i.e. relatively decreased right hemisphere activation) compared to the trials in which pre-target   asymmetry was most negative. Error bars show standard error.


To further explore the significant relationship between change in pre-target   asymmetry with time-on-task and change in RT asymmetry with time-on-task [r =.32, p =.010], we rank ordered participants according to their change in pre-target   asymmetry, and then divided them into three equally sized groups such that group 1 comprised the third of participants who had the least change in pre-target   asymmetry over time, and group 3 comprised those participants who had the greatest   asymmetry change over time (see Fig. 3-C). A one-way between-groups ANOVA (pre-target   asymmetry groups: 1 vs. 2 vs. 3) was applied with RT asymmetry change with time-on-task as the dependent variable.  This revealed a significant effect of   asymmetry change on RT asymmetry change over time [F (1, 65) = 4.13, p = .021].  Bonferroni corrected pairwise comparisons revealed that Group 3, which had the greatest change in pre-target   asymmetry over time, had significantly greater change in RT asymmetry than Group 1 [p = .018].  There was no significant difference between Group 2 and Group 1 or between Group 3 and Group 2 however.  

The effect depicted in Fig. 3-C confirms that the subset of participants with the greatest rightward shift in pre-target   asymmetry (i.e. the greatest increase in   activity over the right hemisphere ROI relative to the left hemisphere ROI) with time-on-task also had a significantly greater shift in RT asymmetry over time.

Finally, to explore the relationship between pre-target   asymmetry and absolute target detection speed we analysed absolute peripheral target RT data (as opposed to the RT asymmetry index) as a function of pre-target   asymmetry on a trial-by-trial basis. A rank-ordered pre-target   asymmetry (bin 1 vs. bin 2 vs. bin 3)   target-side (left vs. right) ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of target-side on the absolute RT data [F (1, 65) = 11.71, p = .001,  = .15], reflecting the overall leftward RT asymmetry/pseudoneglect discussed previously.  A significant main effect of   asymmetry [F (2, 130) = 7.58, p = .001,  = .10] revealed that absolute RTs were slower in those trials with more positive pre-target   asymmetry (see Fig. 3-D).  Bonferroni adjusted comparisons confirmed that RT s were significantly slower during the third of trials in which pre-target   asymmetry was most positive, compared to the third of trials in which pre-target   asymmetry was most negative [p = .003] (Fig. 3-D). Given that more positive   asymmetry indicates greater   activity over the right relative to the left hemisphere ROI, this finding supports the notion that hemispheric   asymmetry is a marker of alertness levels which are known to depend on activation of the right lateralized ventral attention network (Paus, et al., 1997; Sturm & Willmes, 2001). 
The effect of central task load on pre-target   and RT asymmetry
As can be seen from Fig. 2-A, absolute   activity during the pre-target epoch decreased with increasing central load [F (2, 130) = 3.60, p = .030,  =.05] likely reflecting greater engagement due to task difficulty and increased visual processing of stimuli at fixation.  Contrary to predictions however, we did not observe a rightward shift in hemispheric   asymmetry (Fig. 2-B) or RT asymmetry with increased central task load.  Furthermore, the absence of any significant load by time-on-task interactions indicated the observed shifts in   and RT asymmetry with time-on-task were not exacerbated by increasing central task load. A main effect of central load on RT asymmetry was evident [F (2, 130) = 5.01, p = .008,  = .07], which was driven by a leftward shift in RT asymmetry from no-load to low-load [p = .003] and no significant difference in RT asymmetry between low-load and high-load or no-load and high-load.
Post-target   Asymmetry 
 Absolute   activity post target increased as a function of time-on-task [F (1.36, 88.38) = 56.06, p < .001,  =.46] and decreased with greater central task load [F (2, 130) = 8.50, p < .001,  = .12, see Fig. 2-A].  Analysis of the post target   asymmetry index revealed a robust main effect of target-side [F (1, 65) = 84.55, p < .001,  =.57] which reflected greater  -desynchronisation over contralateral electrodes, consistent with previous research (Kelly, et al., 2009; Rihs, et al., 2009; Sauseng, et al., 2005; Thut, et al., 2006; Yamagishi, et al., 2005).  Planned orthogonal polynomial contrasts on the post-target   asymmetry index indicated no significant effects of increasing load or time-on-task on post-target   asymmetry and no-load by time-on-task interaction. The same methods used to observe the link between changes in pre-target   asymmetry and RT asymmetry with time-on-task (described above), were applied to post-target   asymmetry data. The Pearson s correlation between post-target   asymmetry change and RT asymmetry change with time-on-task revealed a non-significant trend in the same direction as was observed in the pre-target analysis [r = .24, p =.053].  The subsequent one-way between-groups ANOVA (post-target   asymmetry change groups: 1 vs. 2 vs. 3), with RT asymmetry change over time as the dependent variable, also did not reach significance [F (1, 65) = 2.54, p = .087].  These data therefore suggest that the link between shifting asymmetry in RT bias and anticipatory pre-target   with time-on-task is more robust than that for stimulus-driven post-target  .
Additional control analysis 
To ensure the pre-target   results were not confounded by activation related to manual response preparation, the same pre-target   asymmetry analyses conducted on occipito-parietal ROIs was also conducted for lateralised electrodes over the motor cortex (left hemisphere: C3 C5; right hemisphere: C4 C6).  Planned orthogonal polynomial contrasts revealed no change in motor cortex   asymmetry with either time-on-task [F (1, 65) = 1.99, p = .163] or central task load [F (1, 65) = 3.31, p = .073] and no interaction between these variables [F (1, 65) = 2.45, p = .122].  The methods used to observe the link between changes in pre-target occipito-parietal   asymmetry and RT asymmetry were applied to pre-target   from the lateralised motor electrodes.  Pearson s correlation between   asymmetry change and RT asymmetry change with time-on-task was not significant [r = .05, p =.675] and the one-way between-groups ANOVA (  asymmetry change groups: 1 vs. 2 vs. 3) revealed no significant effect of   asymmetry change over motor areas on RT asymmetry change with time-on-task [F (1, 65) = 1.77, p = .178]. Thus the key pre-target occipito-parietal   effects reported above were not confounded by activation related to manual response preparation.
DISCUSSION 
This study is the first to link changes in hemispheric activation asymmetry to a rightward shift in spatial bias with time-on-task.  Pre-target occipito-parietal  -band activity, a marker of spatial attention previously linked to the dorsal attention network (Laufs, et al., 2006; Laufs, et al., 2003; Mantini, et al., 2007; Sadaghiani, et al., 2010; Scheeringa, et al., 2009), became more prominent over the right hemisphere relative to the left hemisphere as the task progressed, and this effect was greater in participants who had a more prominent behavioural change in spatial bias over time. While previous studies of preparatory  -activity explicitly cued pre-target attention to one hemifield (e.g. Thut et al., 2006), here participants were asked to distribute their attention across both hemifields in anticipation of peripheral targets.  This allowed investigation of the natural fluctuations in preparatory   asymmetry, in the absence of any strategic top-down biasing of attention.  Our results support the hypothesis that the hemispheric rivalry that characterises spatial attention networks is biased by depleting attention resources and arousal (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011). These findings accord with Corbetta and Shulman s (2011) neuroanatomical model whereby an increased demand on the right-lateralised ventral  alertness  network should disproportionately affect recruitment of the right dorsal orienting network thus driving attention rightward. Pre-target   asymmetry was also significantly associated with absolute response speed to peripheral targets, independent of time-on-task and target-side, adding further support for the notion that hemispheric   asymmetry provides a general marker of arousal   a state that is known to be regulated by the right lateralized attention network (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011; Paus, et al., 1997; Sturm & Willmes, 2001).

The present findings not only provide clues about the interactions between spatial and non-spatial attention mechanisms in the healthy brain, but may also help to elucidate current uncertainties regarding the neural underpinnings of spatial neglect. For example, Mesulam s (1981) widely accepted model of neglect proposes that the right hemisphere directs attention to both hemifields, whereas the left hemisphere only directs attention to the right hemifield. According to this view, left hemisphere damage could be compensated for by the right hemisphere, but right hemisphere damage may not be compensated for thus leading to neglect of the left hemifield.  Neuroimaging studies however suggest that both the left and right dorsal fronto-parietal networks direct attention predominantly to the contralateral visual field and are symmetrically, rather than asymmetrically, organized (Corbetta, Kincade, Ollinger, McAvoy, & Shulman, 2000; De Schotten, et al., 2011; Hopfinger, Buonocore, & Mangun, 2000; Kastner, Pinsk, De Weerd, Desimone, & Ungerleider, 1999; Shulman et al., 2010).  Furthermore, neglect is most commonly associated with lesions to the ventral attention network (specifically the right temporoparietal junction and inferior frontal gyrus) leading to a secondary disruption of structurally undamaged dorsal regions (Corbetta, et al., 2005). Accordingly, Corbetta and Shulman (2011) argue that in the case of neglect, damage to the right lateralised ventral alertness network results in abnormal ventral-to-dorsal network interaction in the right hemisphere, producing an inter-hemispheric activation imbalance of the dorsal networks. Although the current findings are consistent with Corbetta and Shulman s (2011) model, they do not accord with Mesulam s (1981) model which does not account for a rightward shift in spatial bias with time-on-task that is accompanied by a time-dependent shift in pre-target hemispheric   asymmetry. 

Recent EEG and TMS work (Romei, Gross, & Thut, 2010; Thut et al., 2011) suggests that pre-target posterior   may play a causal role in the manifestation of spatial bias.  Romei et al. found that lateralised TMS stimulation at alpha, but not theta or beta frequencies, selectively impaired detection of unilateral visual targets in the contralateral hemifield, and enhanced detection in the ipsilateral hemifield.  The authors argued that the beneficial effect of   stimulation for ipsilateral processing suggests a transcallosal network effect, supporting the use of an   asymmetry index that takes activation across both hemispheres into account to best index changes in the locus of spatial attention.

Previous studies have documented rightward attentional shifts under conditions of increased cognitive load in patients with acquired and developmental disorders of attention (Bellgrove, Eramudugolla, Newman, Vance, & Mattingley, in press; Bonato, Priftis, Marenzi, Umilta, & Zorzi, 2010; Peers, et al., 2006; Russell, Malhotra, & Husain, 2004).  Attempts to replicate the effect in healthy participants have however yielded inconsistent results (Dodds, et al., 2008; Peers, et al., 2006; P rez, et al., 2009).  P rez et al. (2009) found high cognitive load induced a rightward shift in spatial bias and in post-target   asymmetry using a temporal order judgment task. However, the authors did not observe any effect of load on pre-target   asymmetry suggesting that load influenced biases of stimulus-driven processing mechanisms rather than pre-stimulus preparatory processes.  This is in line with O Connell et al. (2011) where increased load asymmetrically disrupted the N1 response to peripheral stimuli for the right, but not left, hemisphere.  Here we found no effect of attentional load on pre- or post-target   asymmetry.  There was a subtle leftward shift in spatial bias from the no central task condition to the low-load condition, but no significant difference between the no central task and high-load conditions or between the low and high-load conditions. These results are not wholly surprising considering the discrepant findings of past research on the relationship between attentional load and spatial bias in healthy participants (Dodds, et al., 2008; P rez, et al., 2009).  Bellgrove et al. (in press) asked children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and right hemisphere patients with neglect to complete a paradigm similar to that used in the current study.  Both groups displayed significant rightward shifts in spatial bias with increased non-spatial attention load at fixation.  Although the significant capacity limitations associated with right hemisphere damage and ADHD make these participants more susceptible to the effects of attentional load (Bellgrove, et al., in press; Bonato, et al., 2010; Peers, et al., 2006; Russell, et al., 2004), it is possible that our manipulation of non-spatial load was not sufficiently strong to induce a rightward shift in attention in healthy participants.

A possible limitation of the current methodology is that  participants took rest breaks during the task. The short rest periods may have partially restored alertness levels, diminishing the effect of time-on-task. Despite this, the observation that time-on-task had a significant effect on behavioural and electrophysiological asymmetry, even with the short rest periods, may encourage greater confidence in the effect.  Future research is needed to explore whether psychostimulants that abolish rightward attention drift over time (Dodds, et al., 2009) also abolish the rightward shift in hemispheric   asymmetry over time. Such a finding would bolster the arguments that  -band activity is an index of cortical activation/deactivation and that spatial bias is balanced by competition between the left and right hemisphere which is sensitive to decreasing arousal.

In conclusion, this is the first study to document a link between the rightward shift in spatial bias that occurs with time on a repetitive task and asymmetry in hemispheric  -activity that changes over time. These results lend support to the hypothesis that spatial bias is balanced by rivalry between the left and right hemisphere, and suggests that this balance is sensitive to decreasing arousal with time-on-task. These results support recent findings in both healthy and clinical samples emphasising the modulation of spatial bias by non-spatial attention processes. Such results in healthy participants accord with findings in neglect suggesting that damage to the right ventral  alertness  network may lead to an inter-hemispheric activation imbalance in structurally intact bilateral dorsal orienting networks.
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by grants from the Australian Research Council (grant DP0770337 to M.A.B.), National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (grant 569533 to M.A.B.) and a NARSAD Young Investigator Award to M.A.B.  M.A.B is supported by a Career Development Award from the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia. The authors would like to thank Matthew Newman for his assistance with MATLAB programming, Robert Hester for programming the task and Dana Schneider for data collection.
 
Follow-up: Stratification of the  time-on-task  effect by dopamine transporter genotype
Figure 3 in the manuscript above shows that time-on-task influenced [A] pre-target  -asymmetry such that  -activity became more prominent over the right parieto-occipital region with time, and also [B] RT asymmetry indicating a rightward shift in visuospatial attention asymmetry over time. Previous work (Newman et al. 2012; see Appendix 2) has shown a main effect of a variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) related to RT asymmetry. Newman et al. (2012) found that when data were stratified by DAT1 genotype, individuals lacking homozygosity for the 10-repeat DAT1 allele (non-10/10) showed a pronounced leftward bias that was significantly different from zero.  In line with past reports from children with ADHD, this leftward bias was attenuated in individuals who were homozygous for the DAT1 10-repeat allele (10/10), suggestive of relatively weaker right hemisphere dominance for spatial attention in that genotype group.  This effect of DAT1 genotype on spatial bias was not modulated by non-spatial attention load.
	DAT1 genotype data was available for 65 of the 66 participants included in this Chapter, enabling a test of whether DAT1 genotype changes the direction of time-on-task shifts in  -asymmetry and RT-asymmetry. Figure 4 below shows the same time-on-task effect depicted in Figure 3A and B above, but stratified by DAT1 genotype (non-10/10 DAT1 vs. 10/10 DAT1).   
Figure 4. [A] Both DAT1 genotype groups show increasing pre-target   asymmetry with time-on-task indicating that  -activity became more prominent over the right parieto-occipital region, relative to the left, over time. [B] The non-10/10 group has a greater left biased (more negative RT asymmetry) than the 10/10 group overall. Since both DAT1 groups show an increase in RT asymmetry (towards zero) between the First Block and the Final Block, there is no clear evidence for differential effect of time-on-task as a function of DAT1 genotype.  
Figure 4A shows that both DAT1 groups have an increase in pre-target   asymmetry with time-on-task, indicating a rightward shift over time [F(1,36)=8.03, p=.006]. There is however no time-on-task   DAT1 group interaction (p= 0.644) and no main effect of DAT1 group (p=0.997) for pre-target   asymmetry. Figure 4B confirms the main effect of DAT1 genotype on RT asymmetry whereby the non-10/10 group have greater leftward bias than then 10/10 group [F(1,63)=3.99, p=.050] and a main effect of time-on-task indicating a rightward shift in RT asymmetry over time [F(1,63)=4.32, p=.042]. There was also a time-on-task   DAT1 group interaction [F(2,126)=3.78, p=.026]. This effect was not linear however, and was driven by data in the Second Block where the difference in RT asymmetry between the DAT1 genotype groups was the largest. This effect cannot be easily interpreted, since both DAT1 groups show an increase in RT asymmetry (towards zero) between the First Block and the Final Block (Figure 4B), there is no clear evidence for differential effect of time-on-task according DAT1 genotype. To confirm this, each participant s change in RT asymmetry between the First Block and the Final Block was calculated and subjected to a between subjects t-test to compare DAT1 genotype groups. This showed no difference in RT asymmetry change over time between the 10/10 (M=0.013, SD=0.044) and the non-10/10 (M=0.011, SD=0.045) groups [t(63) = 0.168, p=0.867]. Therefore, these data do not provide any clear support for differential direction of the time-on-task related shift in RT or  -asymmetry depending on DAT1 genotype.
 
Preamble to peer reviewed paper 2
The previous chapter and other recent studies show that a subtle bias of visual attention favouring left space is attenuated, or shifted rightward, with decreasing alertness/increasing fatigue over time. This rightward shift in attention with time-on-task is observed when averaging across whole samples of healthy participants, and is consistent with theoretical models of the attention networks which posit that decreased activation of a right-hemisphere lateralised  alertness  network drives attention rightward. Before the current chapter was published, Benwell, Thut, Learmonth, & Harvey (2013) reported evidence of differential observer/participant subtypes for the direction of time-on-task shifts in spatial bias, whereby a relatively large proportion of the healthy sample showed a shift of spatial bias in the leftward direction over time, rather than rightward. This was a potentially pivotal finding that would demand re-evaluation of current models of neural networks regulating spatial attention orienting. 
This chapter considers the possibility that the key result of Benwell et al. is an artefact of  regression towards the mean    the phenomenon whereby a variable that is extreme on its initial measurement will tend to be closer to the mean on subsequent measurements.  Given recent interest in individual differences in spatial attention bias within the literature, and the implications that the results of Benwell et al. could have for theoretical models of attention, independent confirmation of the results is important. This chapter set out to empirically test whether Benwell et al. s findings could be driven by regression towards the mean, or whether they likely represent true participant/observer subtypes in the direction of spatial bias shift over time.
This chapter comprises two experiments providing separate confirmations of the pattern of results in Benwell et al., and then shows that rather than being indicative of participant/observer subtypes, these data patterns are likely driven, at least in part, by  regression towards the mean . This chapter concludes that although evidence suggests that individual differences in spatial bias exist within the healthy population and are linked to participant factors such as underlying genetics, receptor binding and neuroanatomy, no convincing evidence is yet available for differential direction of the time-on-task related shift in spatial biases.  

Differential shift in spatial bias over time depends on observers  initial bias:
Observer subtypes, or regression to the mean?


Daniel P Newman a, Gerard M Loughnaneb, Rafael Abe c, Marco T R Zoratti c, Ana C P Martins d, Petra C van den Bogert d, Simon P Kelly e, Redmond G O Connell f,a , Mark A Bellgrove a,f





a. School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
b. School of Engineering and Trinity Centre for Bioengineering, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.
c. Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Mato Grosso, Cuiaba, Brazil.
d. Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil.
e. Department of Biomedical Engineering, City College of the City University of New York, New York.
f. Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience and School of Psychology, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.










Address correspondence to:
Daniel. P. Newman
Email: daniel.newman1@monash.edu
Ph: +61 3 99031931
Fax: +61 3 9905 3948



Running Title: Participant subtypes for spatial bias shift or regression to the mean?
Key words: Alertness; Pseudoneglect; Spatial Attention; Regression towards the mean
 
ABSTRACT
Healthy subjects typically exhibit a subtle bias of visuospatial attention favouring left space that is commonly termed  pseudoneglect . This bias is attenuated, or shifted rightwards, with decreasing alertness over time, consistent with theoretical models proposing that pseudoneglect is a result of the right hemisphere s dominance in regulating attention. Although this  time-on-task effect  for spatial bias is observed when averaging across whole samples of healthy participants, Benwell, Thut, Learmonth & Harvey (2013b) recently presented evidence that the direction and magnitude of bias exhibited by the participant early in the task (left biased, no bias, or right biased) was a stable trait that predicted the direction of the subsequent time-on-task shift in spatial bias.  That is, the spatial bias of participants who were initially left biased shifted in a rightward direction with time, whereas that of participants who were initially right biased shifted in a leftward direction.  If valid, the data of Benwell et al. are potentially important and may demand a re-evaluation of current models of the neural networks governing spatial attention. Here we use two novel spatial attention tasks in an attempt to confirm the results of Benwell et al.. We show that rather than being indicative of true participant subtypes, these data patterns are likely driven, at least in part, by  regression towards the mean  arising from the analysis method employed. Although evidence supports the contention that trait-like individual differences in spatial bias exist within the healthy population, no clear evidence is yet available for participant/observer subtypes in the direction of time-on-task shift in spatial biases.  
 
	Introduction
Extensive research using a range of tasks has established that healthy subjects tend to exhibit a subtle bias of visual attention favouring left space, termed  pseudoneglect  (Bowers & Heilman, 1980, Jewell & McCourt, 2000, Loftus & Nicholls, 2012, Mesulam, 1981, Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2011, Voyer, Voyer, & Tramonte, 2012). However, this leftward bias is attenuated, or shifted rightwards, with decreasing alertness/increasing fatigue over time (Benwell, Harvey, Gardner, & Thut, 2013a; Dodds et al., 2008; Dodds, M ller, & Manly, 2009; Dufour, Touzalin, & Candas, 2007; Manly, Dobler, Dodds, & George, 2005; Newman, O Connell, & Bellgrove, 2013).  These findings are consistent with theoretical accounts which posit that decreased activation of the right-hemisphere lateralised  alertness  network  may drive attention rightward (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011, Posner & Petersen, 1990). 
	In line with this, loud tones and time pressure designed to increase alertness temporarily reduce leftward inattention in patients suffering  spatial neglect , a common outcome of right hemisphere damage that is characterised by deficits in attending to contralesional space (George, Mercer, Walker, & Manly, 2008, Robertson, Mattingley, Rorden, & Driver, 1998).  Furthermore, spatial neglect is temporarily ameliorated by psychostimulants but exacerbated by sedatives (Fleet, Valenstein, Watson, & Heilman, 1987, Geminiani, Bottini, & Sterzi, 1998, Gorgoraptis et al., 2012, Grujic et al., 1998, Lazar et al., 2002, Malhotra, Parton, Greenwood, & Husain, 2006, Mukand et al., 2001).  In healthy populations spatial bias is modulated by sleep deprivation (Manly et al., 2005, Schmitz, Deliens, Mary, Urbain, & Peigneux, 2011) and psychostimulants (Dodds et al., 2009) as well as time-on-task. 
Corbetta and Shulman (2011) propose that the majority of healthy people have a right-hemisphere lateralised ventral attention network which underpins alertness but also modulates inter-hemispheric rivalry in the bilateral dorsal orienting network.  Decreased activation within the right lateralised ventral network may cause a more global decrease in right hemisphere activation, giving the left dorsal orienting network a competitive activation advantage over the right dorsal network, thus driving attention rightwards.
	However, Benwell, Thut, Learmonth, and Harvey (2013b) recently reported differential time-on-task effects depending on the direction of healthy participants' initial spatial bias.  Specifically, participants who showed an initial left bias (LB) during the first block showed a significant rightward shift over the course of subsequent experimental blocks.  Conversely, participants who showed a right bias (RB) in the first task block showed a non-significant leftward shift over time.  As noted by Benwell et al., these findings are not consistent with current views of the interaction between alertness/arousal and spatial orienting, which would predict a rightward shift in spatial bias as alertness wanes over time regardless of initial bias, so that those participants with an initial right bias should shift further rightwards with time-on-task.  Benwell et al. concluded that their results suggest distinct participant (observer) subtypes that may be driven by categorically different anatomical and/or functional asymmetries. This is a potentially pivotal finding, as it throws doubt on the idea that right hemisphere lateralisation of the ventral attention network is a uniform feature of neurologically healthy participants.
Given the important implications that the results of Benwell et al. have for theoretical models of attention, independent confirmation of the findings is required.  One possibility for instance, is that their result may be an artefact of  regression towards the mean  - where a variable that is extreme on its initial measurement will tend to be closer to the mean on subsequent measurements (Barnett, van der Pols, & Dobson, 2005, Galton, 1886, Stigler, 1997).   This may have unintentionally arisen due to the method of splitting participants based on their initial spatial bias (during the first block only) and then including that same data used to categorise participants in the subsequent analyses. Here we aim to empirically test the possibility that the effect reported by Benwell et al. is an artefact of regression to the mean rather than being indicative of true participant subtypes for the direction of time-related shifts in spatial bias. Two experiments employed different spatial attention paradigms in an attempt to confirm the apparent opposing bias shifts between participants who initially show left, versus right, bias. The current paradigms differ to the landmark tasks used by Benwell et al. (2013b) to gauge spatial bias. The current tasks are more similar to other fixation controlled brief presentation paradigms that have been used to document evidence for observer subtypes in visuospatial bias (Newman, O Connell, Nathan, & Bellgrove, 2012, Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2011) and on which shifts in visuospatial bias with time-on-task and decreased alertness have been shown (Dodds et al., 2008, Matthias et al., 2009, Newman et al., 2013).  If opposing directional shifts in visuospatial bias over time in the current paradigms are not due to regression towards the mean, then the effects should hold after (i) appropriate statistical adjustment for bias introduced by regression towards the mean, and (ii) when the initial trials used to categorise participants are not included in the subsequent time-on-task analysis. 
2.1 Methods 
2.1.1 Participants 
Ninety-one healthy right-handed volunteers performed a paradigm that allows derivation of a spatial asymmetry (bias) index. Event-related potential (O Connell, Schneider, Hester, Mattingley, & Bellgrove, 2011), molecular genetics (Newman et al., 2012) and alpha power (Newman et al., 2013) data from a subset of these participants have been previously published. Four participants responded to fewer than 75% of peripheral targets, suggesting they were insufficiently engaged in the task.  These participants were excluded from further analysis. Two were excluded due to a technical error relating to response acquisition. Three participants lacked full time-on-task data within each load condition, so could not be included. This left a final sample of 82 participants (49 female) aged 18 to 47 (M = 23).
2.1.2 Spatial attention (RSVP) task 
Full details of this visual attention task are described elsewhere (O Connell et al., 2011). A schematic of a single trial is illustrated in Fig. 1. Briefly, participants viewed a centrally presented rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) stream for the occurrence of a designated probe item, while simultaneously monitoring peripheral locations for the appearance of a target.  Peripheral targets were presented randomly (but with equal probability) in either left or right target locations (or not at all) at either 1200 msec or 2400msec. In all conditions, participants indicated detection of the peripheral target via a speeded mouse click with their right hand. 
At the end of each trial participants were asked whether the designated central probe item was present and responded  yes/no  via a non-speeded left or right mouse click, respectively. The effect of the central probe has already been explored in these data and reported elsewhere (Newman et al., 2013, 2012) and is not of interest here as data were collapsed across central probe condition in the analysis below. 
Nonetheless a brief description of the central task is warranted. The designated central probe item changed across three conditions (no report, low-load, and high-load) which were completed in separate blocks. The only aspect that differed between these three conditions was the instructions regarding the central probe item.  At the beginning of the no report condition, participants were instructed to simply fixate on the central RSVP stream and monitor for and respond to peripheral targets.  In the low-load condition, participants were instructed that the probe item was any green character within the central stream.  In the high-load condition, the probe item was any red letter within the central stream of characters. The central probe item appeared unpredictably in 50% of the trials and its order of appearance within the RSVP stream was randomised.  The onset of the central probe never coincided with the peripheral target.
 
Fig. 1.  A single trial from the RSVP attention task.  Participants fixated on the central stream searching for a designated probe item, while simultaneously monitoring the periphery for a brief stimulus that could appear to the right or left or not at all (catch trials).  Participants indicated detection of the peripheral target with a speeded mouse click.  At the end of each trial participants were asked whether the central stream probe item was present and responded yes/no with a non-speeded left or right mouse click, respectively.
2.1.3 Procedure 
Participants were seated, supported by a chin rest, at 50 cm viewing distance. Although continuous EEG was recorded only behavioural data are reported herein.  Participants were instructed to maintain central fixation and avoid blinking or moving during each trial, but were encouraged to blink and move in the short breaks between each trial, if desired.  When participants had mastered a practice session, they were left alone in a darkened room to begin the task (described above).  Participants performed the three load conditions over one session.  Each load condition comprised 300 trials with participants receiving short rest periods after every 100 trials and a longer rest period at the end of each condition for which the lights were turned back to normal luminance.  Before beginning a new load condition, participants read on-screen instructions and the experimenter explained the task verbally then ensured the participants  comprehension of the new task. The extended rest intervals between conditions for task instructions meant that it was not appropriate to analyse time-on-task across the whole testing session, and the data were thus collapsed across load conditions in line with Dodds et al. (2008) and Newman et al. (2013).  The duration of each load condition (approximately 48 minutes) ensured sufficient data for time-on-task analyses within each separate condition.
2.1.3 Analysis
In line with Newman et al. (2013) time-on-task was measured by collapsing the data across load, dividing the duration of the task into n number of time bins of equal size, and testing for trends across those bins. A measure of reaction time (RT) bias was derived from peripheral RT (ms) using the following formula:
 
This index gives positive values when reaction-times are faster for right relative to the left targets (rightward spatial bias) and negative values when the opposite is true (leftward bias).  
Consistent with Benwell et al. (2013b)  participants were split into groups according to their initial bias direction (left or right) during the first time-bin to test for differential direction of subsequent bias shift. Given that our paradigm required more than one trial to derive a measure of RT bias, we did not use 95% confidence intervals (CIs) from zero bias during the first time-bin to split participants into groups, as was done by Benwell et al. Rather we split participants according to whether their RT bias index during the first time-bin was positive or negative. Thus, we did not include a  no initial bias group  in our analysis. Time-bin   initial bias group ANOVAs were then conducted on the RT bias index and polynomial contrasts within each initial bias group were used to follow up significant time-bin   initial bias group interactions. Polynomial contrasts are preferred over linear regression for assessing the shift in spatial bias over time because linear regression by definition will fit data to a linear model while polynomial contrasts test for a linear trend but also take into account the possibility that the data may be explained by a higher order model (e.g. quadratic, cubic, fourth order, etc.). 
Three methods were used to gauge whether  regression to the mean  could be driving the differential shift over time for the different spatial bias groups. First, we split the time-course of the task (300 trials) into 3 equal 100 trial time-bins and initial spatial bias was defined as spatial bias during the first of three time-bins.  After testing for any differential shift in the direction of spatial bias change over time, conditional upon initial spatial bias, we split the sample into groups based on bias during the second time-bin, and then based on bias during the third time-bin.  This analysis allowed us to gauge whether  regression to the mean  could be driving the differential shift over time for the different spatial bias groups.  Second, we reasoned that if regression towards the mean does not account for the opposing directions of bias shifts in the two groups, then this effect should hold when the initial trials used to split participants are not included in subsequent time-on-task analysis. To test this, we split the time-course of the task (300 trials) into 6 time-bins (each bin comprising 50 trials, equating to approximately 7 mins per time bin) and categorised participants according to their initial spatial bias direction (left or right) during the first of these time-bins. This number of time-bins was chosen to ensure enough trials per bin for a reliable measure of spatial bias within each time-bin, while still permitting adequate temporal resolution to see the dynamics of time-on-task shifts in spatial bias. For transparency we repeated all analyses splitting the 300 trials instead into five (i.e. 60 trials per bin), four (i.e. 75 trials per bin) and three (i.e. 100 trials per bin) time bins, and the key conclusions reported below hold in each case (see supplementary material). We next performed a time-on-task analysis on the remaining 5 time bins, excluding the data from the first time bin that was used to categorise participants. Third, we tested for regression towards the mean by (i) assessing whether initial spatial bias and subsequent change in spatial bias were significantly correlated, then (ii) applying an adjustment to the initial spatial bias scores to control for regression towards the mean and performing a time-on-task analysis including this adjusted initial RT bias data.
2.2 Results
The ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between time-bin (3 bins) and initial bias group [F(2,160)=4.5, p=.013]. In line with the results of Benwell et al. (2013b), polynomial contrasts within each initial bias group revealed a significant linear shift in RT bias with time-on-task in a rightward direction over time for the initial left bias (LB) group [linear F(1,54)=10.6, p=.002; quadratic F=1.2, p=.278] and a non-significant leftward shift in RT bias in the initial right biased (RB) group [linear F(1,26)=0.4, p=.549; quadratic F=2.7, p=.115] (see Fig. 2.A). After confirming the general pattern of the results of Benwell et al., we next split the sample into groups first based on bias during the 2nd time-bin, and then during 3rd time-bin, and re-ran the time-on-task analysis. Figures 2.A, 2.B, and 2.C show the effect of regression to the mean on differential spatial bias shifts when participants are grouped according to a specific time interval and this interval is then included in the subsequent time-on-task analysis. For each graph in Fig. 2, the most extreme bias measurement is found in the time-bin used to group the sample while bias within the other time bins regress towards the mean. This effect holds true when using more time-bins (tested using 3, 6 and 12 time-bins), however 3 time-bins are reported here to allow depiction using only 3 plots (Fig. 2). Fig. 2.A shows an apparent shift in RT bias towards zero over time when participants are grouped according to bias in the 1st time-bin. When participants are grouped according to the middle time-bin (Fig. 2.B) bias in the 1st and 3rd time bin appears closer to zero than the middle bin, and when participants are grouped according to bias during the 3rd time bin (Fig. 2.C) there is an apparent shift in RT bias away from zero over time. 
 
Fig. 2.  Participant grouping method and regression to the mean may cause opposing directional shifts in in spatial bias over time. [A] Apparent shift in RT bias towards zero over time when participants are grouped according to bias in the 1st time-bin; [B] Bias in the 1st and 3rd time bin appear closer to zero when participants are grouped according to the middle time-bin; [C] Apparent shift in RT bias away from zero over time when participants are grouped according to bias during the 3rd time bin. Error bars represent standard error.

We next split the full series of trials instead into 6 smaller time-bins, then grouped participants based on their bias during the first of these 6 bins and ran a time-on-task analysis including the data used to group participants, as above. Again the results of this analysis were consistent with that of Benwell et al. (2013b). The ANOVA revealed a significant time-bin (6 bins) by initial bias group interaction [F(5,400)=7.87, p<.001] and polynomial contrasts showed a significant linear rightward shift in the direction of RT bias in the initial LB group [linear F(1,54)=9.43, p=.003; quadratic F=12.3, p=.001; cubic F=.68, p=.412; fourth order F=3.0, p=.088; fifth order F=.42, p=.518] and a non-linear leftward shift in RT bias in the initial RB group [linear F(1,26)=.15, p=.698; quadratic F=13.5, p=.001; cubic F=7.7, p=.010; fourth order F=10.3, p=.003; fifth order F=3.0, p=.094] (see Fig. 3.A).  We next excluded data from the first time bin which was used to group participants and ran a time-on-task analysis on only the remaining 5 time bins (see time-bins 2 to 6 in Fig. 3.A). The ANOVA revealed a significant time-bin (5 bins) by initial bias group interaction [F(4,320)=2.61, p=.036]. However, polynomial contrasts show that excluding the first time-bin abolished the rightward shift in RT bias in the initial LB group [linear F(1,54)=.02, p=.892; quadratic F=.20, p=.659; cubic F=1.2, p=.276; fourth order F=.00, p=.944] and resulted in a significant linear shift in the rightward direction in the initial RB group  [linear F(1,26)=10.08, p=.004; quadratic F=.05, p=.821; cubic F=.15, p=.699; fourth order F=6.4, p=.018]. Thus when discounting the initial time-bin (i.e. analysing only bins 2-6 in Fig. 3.A) the effect is opposite to the overall effect in Fig. 3A and to that reported in Benwell et al. (2013b). It appears therefore that these data patterns may reflect regression to the mean rather than meaningful participant subtypes.  Other methods to confirm the existence of regression towards the mean are explored below. 
 
Fig. 3. An apparent differential direction of spatial bias shift over time is abolished when bias introduced by regression towards the mean is controlled for statistically. [A] Apparent shift in RT bias towards zero over time when participants are grouped according to bias in the 1st time-bin; [B] When scores from the 1st time-bin are adjusted to control for regression towards the mean, the apparent differential shift in direction of spatial bias over time is abolished and the RT asymmetry of both groups tends to shift rightwards (less negative/more positive) over time. Error bars represent standard error. 

2.2.1 Confirmation of the regression towards the mean effect 
Regression towards the mean can also be tested by assessing whether initial values and subsequent change are significantly correlated (Barnett et al., 2005, Rocconi & Ethington, 2009). We calculated the change in RT bias between the initial time-on-task bin and the final time-on-task bin for each participant and regressed this against initial RT bias. This revealed a significant correlation, r=.535, p>.001, confirming that a regression towards the mean effect exits here. A similar result was reported by Benwell et al. (2013b; Fig. 6), however in that case it was interpreted as supporting the hypothesis of observer subtypes for directional shifts in spatial bias, rather than an indication of regression towards the mean. 
2.2.2 Statistical adjustment for regression towards the mean 
Once the existence of regression towards the mean is established, a statistical adjustment can be made to the initial scores to reduce the influence of regression to the mean (Roberts, 1980). This adjustment is   ^'= +(1-ryy)( - ), where  ^'=adjusted baseline score,  =initial score, ryy= test-retest reliability and  =mean initial scores of total sample (see Finke et al. (2010) and Rocconi & Ethington (2009) for recent examples of Roberts  (1980) adjustment). We established the test-retest reliability of initial spatial bias (see Fig. 4) and ran a time-on-task analysis on the six time-bins, substituting the adjusted initial RT bias data into the 1st time-bin (see Fig. 3.B).  The ANOVA using the adjusted initial bias scores revealed a significant main effect of time-bin (6 bins) [F(5,400)=2.92, p=.013]. Polynomial contrasts showed that this was best explained by an overall rightward shift in spatial bias over time [linear F(1,80)=10.43, p=.002; quadratic F=.11, p=.745; cubic F=.89, p=.349; fourth order F=.63, p=.634; fifth order F=2.97, p=.089] (see Fig. 3.B). This main effect was modified by a time-bin by initial bias group interaction [F(5,400)=2.66, p=.022]. Polynomial contrasts showed a non-significant rightward shift in the initial LB group [linear F(1,54)=3.06, p=.086; quadratic F=3.53, p=.066; cubic F=.004, p=.953; fourth order F=1.74, p=.193; fifth order F=.25, p=.617] and a significant linear shift - also rightward - in RT bias in the initial RB group [linear F(1,26)=7.06, p=.013; quadratic F=2.769, p=.108; cubic F=1.61, p=.215; fourth order F=5.30, p=.030; fifth order F=3.99, p=.056] (see Fig. 3.B). When controlling for bias introduced by regression towards the mean (Fig 3.B) the effect is opposite to the effect in Fig. 3.A and that reported in Benwell et al. (2013b). It appears therefore that these data patterns reflect regression to the mean rather than meaningful participant subtypes. 
2.2.3 Test-retest reliability of initial spatial bias on the RSVP task
In order to assess the test-retest reliability of our initial bias measure, 28 healthy right handed participants (18 female) aged 21 to 28 (M = 23.5) were recruited to complete the paradigm on two separate days (separated by at least 6 days). The paradigm and procedure were identical to that reported above, with the constraint that participants completed only 100 trials of each load condition, instead of the full 300 trials in each load condition. Each participant s initial bias measurements on each of the two days were taken from the first 50 trials of each load condition (equivalent to the first of 6 time-bins in Fig. 3A above). A Pearson s correlation revealed that the initial bias measures across the two test sessions were significantly correlated, [Pearson r =.425, p =.024; Spearman rho=.365, p=.056], see Fig. 4 below.

 
Fig. 4. Test-retest reliability of initial spatial bias on the RSVP task. Relationship between initial spatial bias scores across separate testing sessions (at least 6 days apart) on the RSVP task. The significant Pearson s correlation between initial bias scores confirms that initial bias is a relatively stable trait.  
  
	Experiment 2
Here we report data from a new cohort of participants on a different spatial attention paradigm to show the generality of the participant grouping and regression to the mean effect across spatial attention paradigms. 
	Methods 
3.1.1 Participants 
Fifty-three healthy right handed volunteers performed a paradigm that allowed derivation of a spatial bias index. Two participants  data were lost due to a technical error in response acquisition, leaving N=51 (24 female) participants aged 20 to 26 (M = 22). 
3.1.2 Random dot motion (RDM) task
Participants completed a bilateral version of the random dot motion (RDM) task (Britten, Shadlen, Newsome, & Movshon, 1992, Newsome, Britten, & Movshon, 1989) in which they fixated centrally and monitored peripheral patches of randomly moving dots (one patch in each hemi-field) for targets defined by instances of coherent motion in the downward direction (see Fig. 5.B). The task was divided into discrete trials but in line with Kelly & O Connell (2013), the dots moved incoherently upon initial presentation and coherent motion (the  target ) was then introduced after a random delay via a seamless step transition from incoherent to coherent motion. Stimuli were presented using a 51-cm CRT display (85 Hz; 1024 768 resolution).
Motion coherence level was consistent during the experimental block and was determined for each participant via a four-down, one-up staircase beginning at 80% coherence and ending after 15 reversals. Steps down (decreased coherence/increased difficulty) were 11% and steps up were 13% - setting the up/down step ratio at 0.84, as advised by Garc a-P rez (1998) to converge on the individualised coherence level at which the participant can achieve approximately 85% accuracy. Each participant s individualised coherence level was calculated by taking the mean coherence at their final 14 reversals.  The average of the individualised coherence levels was 22% (SD=8.3) and average accuracy during the experimental block was 84% (SD=8.8).     
During both the staircase and experimental blocks the central fixation point was a white 5 5-pixel square, and response to targets was given via a speeded simultaneous button press with the left and right hand, executed as soon as participants were sure they had perceived coherent downward motion in either the left or right hemi-field dot patch. A pre-target interval displaying random motion lasted either 1.82, 2.22 or 2.62 s, chosen randomly on a trial-by-trial basis. Coherent motion was always in the downward direction and only ever occurred once per trial in either the left or right hemi-field (with equal probability).  Catch trials in which no coherent motion appeared were also included and participants were instructed to make no response on these trials.  Catch trials occurred at random intervals with 25% frequency during the staircase block and 10% frequency during the experimental block. Any blink or fixation break (defined as a deviation >4 degrees from fixation point) during a trial was recorded by an Eyelink1000 eye tracker and the trial was immediately discontinued and restarted after a brief message reminding participants to  keep your eye on the spot . Thus all participants completed one experimental block containing 330 trials with no breaks from fixation or blinks, and 300 of these trials contained coherent downward motion targets.
All stimuli were white and presented against a black background. The circular dot patches were of 8 degrees diameter with the centre of each patch situated 4 degrees below and 10 degrees to the left or right of central fixation point (see Fig 5). During random motion, an average of 118 white dots (each dot 6x6 pixels) were placed at random and independent positions within each of the left and right hemi-field circular patches at a rate of 21.25 frames/sec. During coherent downward motion, a proportion of the dots (i.e. the coherence level) were randomly selected on each frame to be displaced by a fixed distance of 0.282 degrees in the downward direction on the following frame, resulting in a motion speed of 6 degrees/sec.
 
Fig. 5. Random dot motion (RDM) task. Participants fixated on the central dot and monitored the peripheral patches of randomly moving dots [A] for instances of coherent downward motion [B].  Participants responded to downward motion targets via a speeded button press.  Downward motion targets only occurred once per trial in either the left or right hemi-field (with equal probability), except for  catch trials  in which no coherent motion appeared. Pre-target random motion lasted either 1.82, 2.22 or 2.62 s, chosen randomly on a trial-by-trial basis.
3.1.3 Procedure
The task was carried out in a dimly lit sound-attenuated room with participants seated, supported by a chin rest, at 57 cm viewing distance. Again, although continuous EEG was recorded only behavioural data are reported herein.  Participants were instructed to maintain central fixation and to avoid blinking or moving during each trial, but were encouraged to blink and move in the short breaks between each trial, if desired.  When participants had mastered a practice session, they were left alone in a darkened room to begin the staircase block (described above) which lasted approximately 15mins.  After the staircase, each participant performed the experimental block (lasting approximately 35 mins) at the specific coherence level determined during that participant s staircase block.  Before beginning the task, participants read on-screen instructions and the experimenter explained the task verbally to ensure adequate comprehension. Participants were left alone in the recording room to complete each block. 
3.1.4 Analysis
As in Experiment 1, an RT (ms) bias index that gives positive values for rightward spatial bias and negative values for leftward bias can be derived from this paradigm. Time-on-task was operationalized by dividing the trials into five time-bins (i.e. 66 trials per time-bin, equating to approximately 7 mins per time-bin). This number of time-bins was chosen to ensure enough trials per bin for reliable measures of spatial bias within each time-bin, while still permitting adequate temporal resolution to see the dynamics of time-on-task shifts in spatial bias. For transparency we repeated the analysis splitting the total 330 trials into six (i.e. 55 trials per bin), four (i.e. 82 trials per bin) and three (i.e. 110 trials per bin) time-bins, and the key conclusions reported below hold in each case (see supplementary material). Participant grouping for initial bias was based on leftward or rightward bias indices during the first time-bin, as in Experiment 1. The first time bin was included in the subsequent time-bin   initial bias group ANOVA.  We then excluded the data from the first time bin which was used to form the initial bias groups and ran the time-bin   initial bias group analysis on the remaining four time bins. Finally, we tested for regression towards the mean by assessing whether initial spatial bias (during the first of five time-bins) and subsequent change in spatial bias were significantly correlated. We then applied an adjustment to the initial spatial bias scores to control for regression towards the mean and performed a time-on-task analysis including this adjusted initial RT bias data. 
3.2 Results
As in Experiment 1, when the data used to split participants into initial bias groups was included in the subsequent time-on-task analysis the results were in line with that of Benwell et al. (2013b).  A time-bin (5 bins) by initial bias group interaction [F(4,196)=5.03, p=.001] was driven by a statistically significant linear rightward shift in RT bias over time in the initial LB group [linear F(1,20)=16.95, p=.001; quadratic F=.133, p=.719; cubic F=.96, p=.345; fourth order F=.02, p=.889] and a non-linear leftward shift in RT bias in the initial RB group [linear F(1,29)=.66, p=.422; quadratic F=8.53, p=.007; cubic F=6.28, p=.018; fourth order F=2.04, p=.164] (see Fig. 6.A). When the data from the first of five time bins was discarded after having been used for participant sorting, and the analysis carried out on the remaining four time bins (bins 2 to 5 in Fig 6.A), the rightward linear shift in RT bias in the initial LB group was still present [linear F(1,20)=4.66, p=.043; quadratic F=.12, p=.665; cubic F=.193, p=.665] and a non-significant shift - also in the rightward direction   was present in the initial RB group  [linear F(1,29)=3.69, p=.065; quadratic F=.01, p=.952; cubic F=.29, p=.595]. Thus the differential direction of spatial bias shift was abolished when the time-bin 1 data used to group participants was discarded (i.e. see bins 2-5 in Fig. 6.A)
 
Fig. 6. An apparent differential direction of spatial bias shift over time is abolished after controlling for bias introduced by regression towards the mean. [A] Participants are grouped according to bias in the 1st time-bin and this grouping data is included in the time-on-task analysis, producing an apparent differential direction of spatial bias shift over time between the two groups; [B] When scores from the 1st time-bin are adjusted to control for regression towards the mean, the apparent differential shift in direction of spatial bias is abolished. Error bars represent standard error.

3.2.1 Confirmation of the regression towards the mean effect 
As in Experiment 1, here we assessed whether initial bias values and subsequent change were significantly correlated, providing a further test for regression towards the mean (Barnett et al., 2005, Rocconi & Ethington, 2009). We calculated the change in RT asymmetry between the initial time-on-task bin and the fifth/final time-on-task bin for each participant and regressed this against initial RT bias. This revealed a significant correlation, r=.494, p>.001, confirming that a regression towards the mean effect exists. We note again that although a similar result was reported by Benweil et al. (2013b; Fig. 6), our conclusions are antithetical. Namely, the existence of the significant correlation indicates regression to the mean. 
3.2.2 Statistical adjustment for regression towards the mean 
After confirming the existence of regression towards the mean, we established the test-retest reliability of the initial bias measure (see Fig. 7) and performed the same adjustment to initial bias scores (see Experiment 1) to reduce the influence of regression to the mean (Roberts, 1980). The ANOVA using the adjusted initial bias scores revealed a non-significant main effect of time-on-task (5 bins) [F(4,196)=2.20, p=.071], and no significant time-bin by initial bias group interaction [F(4,196)=.34, p=.851].  Thus when controlling for bias introduced by regression towards the mean (Fig 6.B) the differential shift in spatial bias reported in Fig. 6.A is abolished.
3.2.3 Test-retest reliability of initial spatial bias on RDM task
Twenty-seven healthy right handed participants (17 female) aged 21 to 28 (M = 23.6) completed the paradigm on two separate days in order to assess the test-retest reliability of our initial bias measure. The procedure was identical to that reported above, except participants completed 110 trials of the RDM task, instead of the full 330 trials. Each participant s initial bias measurements were taken from the first 66 trials (equivalent to the first of the 5 time-bins in Figure 6.A above) on each of the two days and analysed with a Pearson s correlation. This revealed that the initial bias measure were significantly correlated across the two sessions, [Pearson r =.464, p =.015; Spearman rho=.405, p=.036], see Fig. 7 below.
 
Fig. 7. Test-retest reliability of initial spatial bias on the RDM task. Relationship between initial spatial bias scores across separate testing sessions (at least 6 days apart) on the random dot motion (RDM) task. The significant Pearson s correlation between initial bias scores confirms that initial bias is relatively stable over time.

Discussion
The observation by Benwell et al.  (2013b) that time-on-task has opposite effects on spatial bias in individuals who are initially classified as left-, compared to right-, biased is a potentially pivotal finding that would demand a re-evaluation of current models of the neural networks governing spatial attention. In both Experiments 1 and 2, we used novel spatial attentions tasks to provide confirmation of Benwell et al. s differential time-on task effects, whereby participants with an initial LB showed a significant rightward shift in spatial bias over the course of the experimental session, whereas participants with an initial RB showed a non-significant leftward shift (Fig. 2.A, 3.A and 6.A). Subsequent analysis however, showed that the apparent differential shifts with time-on-task may be driven by regression to the mean due to the participant grouping and analysis method employed (Fig 2.B and 2.C). The differential direction of time-on-task shift does not hold when regression towards the mean is controlled by excluding the initial data used to split participants from subsequent analysis. Nor does it hold when the influence of regression towards the mean is statistically controlled by adjusting the initial spatial bias scores (Roberts, 1980). Therefore, time-on-task may not truly have an opposite effect on the direction of spatial bias drift in participants with an initial LB versus participants with an initial RB.
A number of methodological differences between the current study and that of Benwell et al. (2013b) must be acknowledged.  First, the current study used two different paradigms to measure spatial bias. The paradigms differ to the landmark task used by Benwell et al. (2013b) to gauge visuospatial bias. The current tasks are more similar to the fixation-controlled, lateral stimuli paradigms that have been used to document participant factors (i.e. genetics and anatomy) underpinning individual differences in visuospatial bias (Newman, O Connell, Nathan, & Bellgrove, 2012, Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2011) and on which shifts in visuospatial bias with time-on-task and decreased alertness have been observed (Dodds et al., 2008, Matthias et al., 2009, Newman et al., 2013). Since the pattern of data presented in Benwell et al. was confirmed using both of our paradigms, we argue that this shows the generalizability of the results across spatial attention paradigms and validates our subsequent demonstration that those results may be driven by regression to the mean.  Second, Benwell et al. used use 95% CIs from zero bias during the first time-bin to categorise participants into initial bias groups, while the current study categorised participants according to whether their RT bias index was positive or negative during the first time-bin and thus did not include a  no initial bias group . The use of 95% CIs to categorise participants creates more extreme left and right initial bias groups which may be prone to regression towards the mean. However, since the use of 95% CIs to categorise participants provides more confident categorisation into initial bias groups, it could be argued that this should attenuate the effect of regression towards the mean. Even if this argument is accepted, some portion of Benwell et al. s subjects will still be categorised into the initial LB/RB group based on random variation, unless the test-retest correlation coefficient for initial block bias is 1.0. Via a number of correlation analyses, Benwell et al. demonstrate that the test-retest correlation coefficient for initial bias is approximately 0.77, and therefore there would still be a tendency for the mean bias of each group to have a relative shift toward zero after the first block due to the principle of regression to the mean (Barnett et al., 2005, Galton, 1886, Stigler, 1997).  Third, Benwell et al. included only the first vs. final time-bin in the time-on-task   initial bias group ANOVAs and conducted separate linear regression analyses across all time-bins to assess whether the time-on-task related change in spatial bias fitted a linear model. The current study instead included all time-bins in the time-on-task   group ANOVA and used polynomial contrasts to assess whether a linear model is the best fit for the time-on-task related change in spatial bias. Linear regression by definition will fit data to a linear model, while reporting all polynomial contrasts takes into account the possibility that the data may be also explained by a higher order model (e.g. quadratic, cubic, 4th order, etc.).  
The significant test-retest reliability of initial spatial bias reported here and by Benwell et al. provides further evidence that the direction/magnitude of baseline spatial bias is relatively stable (Tomer, 2008). However these data cannot establish the existence of differential categories for the direction of spatial bias shift over time because the test-retest sessions only included initial trials rather than the full task. Nonetheless, stable trait-like differences in spatial attention bias likely exist across the healthy population and have been linked to such participant factors as underlying genetics, receptor binding and neuroanatomy  (Bellgrove et al., 2007, Newman et al., 2012, Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2011, Tomer, 2008). Many studies have now replicated the overall rightward shift in spatial bias with decreasing alertness over time (Benwell, Harvey, et al., 2013a; Dodds et al., 2008, 2009; Dufour et al., 2007; Manly et al., 2005; Newman et al., 2013).  Moreover, Newman et al. (2013) showed that pre-target   power became more prominent over the right, relative to left, hemisphere as the reaction time task progressed over 48-min and that this change was correlated with a significant rightward shift in spatial bias. These data are broadly consistent with the notion that fatigue of the right-hemisphere lateralised ventral  alertness  network asymmetrically affects recruitment of the conjoined dorsal orienting network thus driving attention rightward.  Although one could conceive that a range of individual participant factors (genetic, pharmacological, and neuroanatomical) could modulate activity within the attention networks and thus the time-on-task modulation of spatial bias, we contend that such evidence is currently lacking.  Although promising, our experiments suggest that the findings of Benwell et al. (2013b) are likely driven, at least in part, by regression towards the mean and therefore may not be indicative of true participant/ observer subtypes. A re-analysis of Benwell et al. s data, adjusting the initial scores to control for regression to the mean, or discarding the initial trials used to categorise participants from subsequent time-on-task analyses, may give clearer evidence regarding the existence of true participant/observer subtypes in the direction of spatial bias shift over time. 


Acknowledgments
This research was supported by funding from the Australian Research Council under the Future Fellowship scheme to MAB [FT130101488].

Preamble to peer reviewed paper 3
The two previous chapters of this thesis discuss the relationship between alertness and spatial attention bias. Other examples of this intriguing relationship include the observation that inattention of left space in patients suffering unilateral neglect can be temporarily overcome by alerting tones (Robertson et al., 1998), and healthy individuals exhibiting impairments in directing attention to left space during periods of drowsiness or following sleep deprivation (Bareham et al., 2014; Manly et al., 2005). These effects are thought to arise from a right-hemisphere dominant ventral alertness network modulating interhemispheric competition within fronto-parietal spatial attention networks. Thus far, however, we have lacked non-invasive manipulations of alertness that lead to enduring improvements in attention to left space. One promising avenue is offered by the acute alerting effect of bright light, which is mediated by intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) that are maximally sensitive to blue light (~480nm) (Aston-Jones, Chen, Zhu, & Oshinsky, 2001; Berson, Dunn, & Takao, 2002; Gonz lez & Aston-Jones, 2006; Gooley, Lu, Chou, Scammell, & Saper, 2001; Perrin et al., 2004; Schmidt et al., 2011; Vandewalle et al., 2006; Zaidi et al., 2007).
This chapter asked if exposure to blue-enriched light could activate right-hemisphere attention networks, thus enhancing attention to left space. The results of this chapter showed that exposure to higher, relative to lower, intensity blue-enriched light enhanced response-times for stimuli in the left, but not right, visual hemifield. This processing benefit was mediated by a specific effect of light intensity on right-hemisphere parieto-occipital  -power. These behavioural and neurophysiological effects were sustained over task duration (~36 minutes). These data provide convincing evidence for a direct modulatory influence of alertness on the physiological substrates of spatial attention, using a non-invasive, non-pharmacological manipulation of alertness which lasts post light exposure.
The candidate notes that analysis scripts and paradigm code (https://github.com/DanielPNewman/BlueEnrichedLightRepo) as well as the raw data (https://dx.doi.org/10.4225/03/574CEA1FAFB69) are open access and available under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 International License. 


Ocular exposure to blue-enriched light has an asymmetric influence on neural activity and spatial attention


Daniel P. Newman1, Steven W. Lockley1,2, Gerard M. Loughnane3,4, Ana Carina P. Martins1,5, Rafael Abe1,6, Marco T. R. Zoratti1,6, Simon P. Kelly7, Megan H. O Neill1, Shantha M. W. Rajaratnam1,2, Redmond G O Connell4,8, Mark A Bellgrove1


1 Monash Institute for Cognitive and Clinical Neurosciences (MICCN), School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
2 Division of Sleep and Circadian Disorders, Departments of Medicine and Neurology, Brigham and Women s Hospital, Boston, USA and Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
3 School of Engineering, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
4 Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. 
5 Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil.
6 Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Mato Grosso, Cuiaba, Brazil.
7 School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland.
8School of Psychology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.

Correspondence: Daniel. P. Newman; daniel.newman1@monash.edu
Conflicts of interest: none declared.

Additional Information: Analysis scripts and paradigm code (https://github.com/DanielPNewman/BlueEnrichedLightRepo) as well as the raw data (https://dx.doi.org/10.4225/03/574CEA1FAFB69) are open access and available under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 International License.
Abstract
Brain networks subserving alertness in humans interact with those for spatial attention orienting. We employed blue-enriched light to directly manipulate alertness in healthy volunteers.  We show for the first time that prior exposure to higher, relative to lower, intensities of blue-enriched light speeds response times to left, but not right, hemifield visual stimuli, via an asymmetric effect on right-hemisphere parieto-occipital  -power. Our data give rise to the tantalising possibility of light-based interventions for right hemisphere disorders of spatial attention.

Introduction
The mechanisms for alertness in humans interact with those for spatial attention orienting in an intriguing fashion1,2. For example, the debilitating inattention of left space observed in patients suffering from unilateral spatial neglect subsequent to right-hemisphere damage can be temporarily overcome by phasic alerting tones 3. Sleep deprivation in healthy participants causes relative left hemifield inattention in the visual domain 4, while a pronounced auditory inattention to left space occurs during drowsy periods prior to sleep onset 5. Brain imaging work in both neglect patients and neurologically healthy participants suggests that the distribution of attention between the hemifields is balanced by competitive activation between the hemispheres, specifically within a bilaterally represented dorsal network for spatial attention orienting 1,6,7. Current models propose that this bilateral orienting network interacts with the right-hemisphere-lateralised ventral network subserving non-spatial processes such as alertness 1,2 which may be preferentially  innervated by the locus-coeruleus/noradrenergic (LC-NA) system 1,8,9. 
Despite demonstrations that manipulations of alertness can transiently shift spatial attention bias, neuroscience has thus far failed to identify non-invasive methods of manipulating alertness that lead to an enduring improvement in attention to left space. One promising avenue for manipulating alertness is offered by recent photobiology studies of light.   Although it is recognised that light exerts powerful alerting effects on brain and behaviour, its mechanism of action has only recently been studied. Specifically, recent research has identified a set of intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) which are maximally sensitive to short wavelength (blue) light (~480nm) and which mediate a light induced alerting signal to the human brain, in a dose dependent manner 10 12.  Since (a) rodent work suggests that the alerting effects of light on the brain are achieved in part via inputs from the suprachiasmatic nucleus to the LC-NA arousal system13,14, and (b) human brain imaging shows that light exposure activates key areas of right-hemisphere attention networks 15,16, we asked if light-induced manipulations of alertness could be harnessed to activate right-hemisphere attention networks and thus improve the  direction of attention to left space.
We hypothesized that pre-exposure to higher, relative to lower, intensities of blue-enriched light, would promote attention to the left visual hemifield, indicative of enhanced activation of right hemisphere attention networks. Neurologically healthy subjects participated in an electrophysiological study of visuospatial attention subsequent to 1 hour exposure of either low (50lux), medium (350lux) or high (1400lux) intensity blue-enriched light.  The effect of light on attention-related brain activity was measured via hemisphere-specific parieto-occipital  -power (8-13Hz), a robust EEG marker of spatial attention 17 which is also sensitive to blue light exposure 18. Our application of multi-level statistical modelling 19 allowed us to simultaneously model behaviour as a function of both categorical experimental conditions and pre-target neural activity, thus fully capitalizing on the richness of the single-trial EEG data.
This study yielded a number of novel and exciting findings. Light exposure enhanced response times for visual stimuli in the left, but not the right, hemifield, with a parametric speeding of left hemifield responses caused by increasing the intensity of the light. This effect did not diminish over the duration of the ~36 min attention task demonstrating that prior light exposure had an enduring impact on attention for left hemifield stimuli. This processing benefit for left hemifield stimuli was mediated by an effect of increasing light intensity on right-hemisphere parieto-occipital  -power. Our data provide the most convincing evidence yet for a direct modulatory influence of alertness on the physiological substrates of spatial attention, using a non-invasive, non-pharmacological manipulation of alertness which lasts post light exposure.  

Results 
Subsequent to a 1 hour exposure to low (50lux), medium (350lux) or high (1400lux) intensity blue-enriched fluorescent light (henceforth the  Light  manipulation), neurologically healthy participants performed a ~36 minute variant of the random dot motion task20 22 which involved monitoring four bilaterally distributed dot kinematograms. On each trial, after a variable delay, one of the kinematograms underwent a transition from incoherent to coherent motion (upward or downward direction) which participants were instructed to report via a speeded right-hand button press. Participants were not required to indicate either the direction or location of coherent motion. Testing occurred in the evening after ~14 hours of wakefulness. Testing an independent sample (N=80) using a similar random dot paradigm between 9:30am and 3:00pm with no light manipulation showed that under normal daytime alertness healthy participants responded faster to coherent motion targets in the left than right hemifield [t(79) = -3.06, p = 0.003; see supplemental information for details]. The effect of prior light exposure on cortical spatial attention networks was measured via hemisphere-specific parieto-occipital  -power (8-13Hz) recorded during the 500ms prior to coherent motion onset17. We used maximum likelihood ratio tests for the fixed effects of light intensity, target hemifield and hemisphere on single trial measures of  -power and response-time (RT) (see Methods for details).
Higher light intensity speeds target detection, specifically to left-hemifield targets
Although the main effect of Target hemifield [ 2(1) = 1.21, p = 0.272]  was not significant, there was a main effect of Light [ 2(2) = 9.95, p= 0.006] on RT which was modified by a significant Light   Target hemifield interaction [ 2(2) = 6.81, p= 0.033]. Separate tests for each Target-hemifield showed no impact of Light on RTs for right-hemifield targets [all ps>0.926], while left-hemifield RTs were significantly faster after high intensity Light (M= 490ms, SE=1.65) than after both medium (M= 497ms, ES=1.77) [b= -6.83, SE=2.15, t= -3.17, p=0.004] and low intensity (M= 499ms, SE=1.76) [b= -8.35, SE=2.14, t= -3.90, p<0.001] Light exposure (Figure 1A). The difference between low and medium intensity was not significant [b= -1.53, SE=2.15, t= -0.71, p=0.758]. A lack of any significant Target-hemifield   Vertical Visual Field [ 2(1) = 1.11, p= 0.292], Light   Vertical Visual Field [ 2(2) = 0.82, p= 0.662] or Target-hemifield   Vertical Visual Field   Light [ 2(2) = 0.31, p= 0.856] interactions, indicated that the effect of Light on left-hemifield RTs was consistent regardless of whether the target appeared in the upper or lower visual field. 
We next sought to determine whether the influence of the Light manipulation persisted as a function of time-on-task (trial number). The lack of any Light   Target-hemifield   Time-on-task [ 2(2) = 2.89, p= 0.236] or Light   Time-on-task interactions for left-hemifield RTs specifically [ 2(1) = 1.88, p= 0.389], indicated that the effect of Light on left-hemifield RTs persisted over the duration of the task. There was however a significant Target-hemifield   Time-on-task interaction [ 2(2) = 9.41, p= 0.002] whereby responses were slower for right than left-hemifield targets at the beginning of the task but this advantage waned with time (see Supplemental Figure 1). This latter observation is consistent with previous reports of a rightward shift in spatial attention bias with time-on-task4,23 25. 
Light intensity asymmetrically modulates  -power over right-hemisphere regions that are sensitive to spatial attention orienting
Prior work has shown that night-time exposure to blue light increases  -power in waking EEG12,18,26. The current data support this observation since higher intensity Light increased pre-target (mean -500ms to target onset)  -power pooled from all parieto-occipital electrodes (see Supplementary Results). Given Light had an asymmetric effect on behaviour (Figure 1A), and since hemispheric asymmetry in posterior  -power is an established EEG correlate of the distribution of attention in space17, we asked whether higher intensities of Light differentially influenced  -band activity within each hemisphere. To this end we measured  -band activity over each hemisphere during the 500ms interval immediately prior to coherent motion onsets. A scalp plot of the cumulative change in  -power across Light conditions (i.e. the sum of the change in grand average  -power between conditions [(High-Low) + (High-Medium) + (Medium-Low)]) shows that Light influenced parieto-occipital  -power over right-hemisphere electrodes more than over left electrodes (Figure 1C). To explore this effect further, single-trial  -power measures were pooled from the four lateral parieto-occipital electrodes within each hemisphere that exhibited the strongest desynchronisation in response to covert shifts in attention towards left versus right-hemifield targets (see Experimental Methods). Light had a significant effect on  -power [ 2(2) = 9.80, p= 0.007] that was modified by a significant Light   Hemisphere interaction [ 2(2) =17.0, p<0.001; see Figure 1D] while there was no main effect of Hemisphere [ 2(1) = 0.89, p= 0.891].  
Follow-up contrasts showed that the Light   Hemisphere interaction was driven by a greater effect of Light on right-hemisphere than on left-hemisphere  -power (Figure 1 C and D).  The effect of Light on the right-hemisphere scaled significantly in a step-wise fashion [high versus low, b= 0.07, SE=0.007, t= 9.55, p<0.0001; high versus medium, b= 0.03, SE=0.007, t=3.57, p=0.001; medium vs low, b= 0.04, SE=0.007, t= 5.97, p<0.0001]. In contrast, there was no difference between medium and low Light on left-hemisphere  -power [b= 0.01, SE=0.007, t= 1.66, p=0.220], while the other two contrasts were significant but of smaller effect size [high versus low, b= 0.03, SE=0.007, t= 4.33, p<0.001; high versus medium, b= 0.02, SE=0.007, t=2.66, p=0.021]. A main effect of Time-on-task [ 2(1) =99.07, p<0.0001] indicated  -power tended to increase over time, in line with previous findings25,27,28. However, there were neither Light   Time-on-task [ 2(2) = 1.42, p= 0.491] nor Light   Hemisphere   Time-on-task interactions [ 2(2) = 0.97, p= 0.615], indicating that the specific effect of Light on right hemisphere  -power persisted throughout the task.
 
Figure 1: The intensity of blue-enriched light influenced response-times to targets in the left, but not right, visual hemifield [A]. The difference in grand average post-target  -desynchronisation for left versus right-hemifield targets shows that lateral parieto-occipital electrodes were most sensitive to covert shifts in attention towards each hemifield [B]. Increased intensity of blue-enriched light increases  -power over the right hemisphere more than left hemisphere electrodes [C and D]. Note that the electrodes exhibiting strongest modulation by light in [C] are the same electrodes that were most sensitive to shifts in spatial attention [B]. Error bars represent 95% CIs. 

Higher light intensity suppresses the effect of  -power on forthcoming RTs 
It is commonly assumed that posterior  -band activity scales inversely with cortical excitability29 33. This view is supported by studies showing an inverse relationship between pre-stimulus  -power and perceptual performance, such that higher  -power is associated with slower RTs and diminished accuracy20,34 40. As shown above (Figure 1D), however, exposure to higher intensity blue-enriched light actually increased  -power while simultaneously improving RTs. In a further analysis we examined the possibility that blue-enriched light exposure modifies the relationship between  -power and behavioural performance. Single-trial  -power measures were pooled from the same posterior left- and right-hemisphere electrodes used above, and entered into a model predicting RT over and above the Light   Target-hemifield effect. In line with previous studies20,34,35, greater  -power was generally associated with slower forthcoming RTs [ 2(1) =4.89, p<0.027]. Crucially, this relationship was modified by a Light intensity    -power interaction [ 2(2) = 35.14, p<0.0001]. Follow-up contrasts revealed that higher intensity Light suppressed the relationship between  -power and forthcoming RTs (see Figure 2). This suppression effect scaled with light intensity [high versus medium b= -2.21, SE=0.82, t= -2.70, p=0.019; medium vs low b= -2.80, SE=0.86, t= -3.26, p=0.003; high vs low b=-5.02, SE=0.85, t= -5.9., p<0.001]. No other interactions reached significance, and there were no substantive differences in results when  -power measures were used from the left or right hemisphere separately instead of pooling across hemisphere.
 
Figure 2. Although greater parieto-occipital   (8-13 Hz) power preceding target onset was associated with slower response times, exposure to higher intensity blue-enriched light weakened this relationship. Inserted histograms show that the distribution of observations as a function of pre-target  -power does not change across light conditions. Error bars represent 95% CIs.

Right hemisphere  -power mediates the causal effect of light intensity on left-hemifield RTs
We next sought to test whether the causal effect of Light intensity on left-hemifield RTs (Figure 1A) was mediated by light s influence on right-hemisphere  -power (Figure 1D). Only low (~50 lux) versus high (~1400 lux) Light conditions were used as mediation analysis necessitates binary categorical predictors. Path parameters for the mediation model were calculated from the fixed effects of Light and  -power using the same linear multilevel modelling technique as above. A Sobel test41 demonstrated that the effect of Light intensity on left-hemifield RTs was partially mediated by parieto-occipital  -power pooled from right-hemisphere (Indirect effect = 0.35, se= 0.16, p=0.03). Inspection of path parameters from the significant mediation model (Figure 3) show that path c' is opposite in sign to paths a and b, indicating an  inconsistent mediation  effect42. This accords with our observations above that higher Light intensity increases  -power (Figure 2) while also suppressing its relationship with forthcoming RTs (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Sobel tests revealed that pre-target  -power pooled from right hemisphere parieto-occipital channels mediates the causal influence between increasing light intensity and faster RTs for left-hemifield targets. The mediation model shows that path c' is opposite in sign to paths a and b suggesting an  inconsistent mediation  effect in line with higher Light intensity both increasing  -power (Figure 1D) while also suppressing its slowing effect on forthcoming RTs.

In summary, we showed that greater  -power is associated with slower forthcoming RTs in line with previous studies20,34,35, however exposure to relatively higher intensities of blue-enriched light simultaneously increases  -power over parieto-occipital regions and improves behavioural performance for left-hemifield targets. This effect is driven in part by increasing light intensity exerting a suppressive effect on the relationship between  -power and behavioural performance, thereby facilitating faster RTs for left-hemifield targets.

Discussion
Although it is well established that light exerts a powerful alerting influence on the human brain, its specific influence on the physiological substrates of spatial attention has not been explored. Here we show for the first time that pre-exposure to high intensity blue-enriched light can speed detection specifically for left-hemifield visual targets. This left-hemifield enhancement is driven by an enduring effect of exposure to light on right-hemisphere parieto-occipital  -power. Our results provide the most compelling evidence yet that a direct manipulation of non-spatial alertness can modulate activity within spatial attention brain networks. That these effects were achieved by manipulating the intensity of blue-enriched light, a non-pharmacological, reversible and safe stimulant, prompts consideration of future research into whether light exposure may have therapeutic benefit for disorders of spatial attention.   
There are a number of novel aspects to the data reported herein. First, since previous studies of spatial attention have reported decreased  -power in the hemisphere contralateral to an attended target location, we might have expected that the light-induced enhancement of left-hemifield performance would have been coupled with a corresponding decrease in right-hemisphere  -power. Instead, however, we observed a light-induced increase in right-hemisphere  -power. To understand these seemingly counterintuitive findings, we tested a model by which reaction time could be predicted by the intensity of blue-enriched light, pre-target  -power and their interaction. Whereas at lower light intensity we observed the stereotypical relationship between increasing  -power and slower response times, higher light intensities weakened this effect of  -power on forthcoming response times. 
So what biological process might underpin this light-induced suppression of the relationship between  -power and response times that is typically seen during tasks of spatial attention? Previous work at the intersection of circadian neuroscience and photobiology has shown that waking  -power measured at rest, which appears to be strongly modulated by the circadian system43, is increased during exposure to monochromatic blue light at night12,18,26. Lockley et al hypothesized that the alerting effect of light during the night-time may be achieved by  -modulation reflecting  inhibition of the circadian drive for sleep  26. Since the participants in our study were tested in the evening after ~14 hours of wakefulness, it is possible that higher intensity blue-enriched light invoked such a mechanism, and this separate source of  -modulation merged on the scalp with the signal produced by  -generators for spatial attention. Specifically, we hypothesise that night-time exposure to higher intensities of blue-enriched light disrupts the slowing influence of  -power on forthcoming response times, by introducing greater  -modulation related to inhibition of the circadian drive for sleep. That this effect is maximal for right-hemisphere parieto-occipital  -power may explain the enhancement of attention to the left hemifield.   Although previous studies of circadian and blue light modulation of resting  -power split the  -band into low and high   12,18,26,44, here the impact of blue-enriched light on spatial-attention related  -power was invariant across the 8-13Hz range, consistent with literature on the relationship between spatial attention and  -power17,39 .   Nevertheless, future studies may benefit from explicitly contrasting the impact of exposure to blue-enriched light on both resting and active task scenarios as well as testing the generalisation of results reported herein to daytime light exposure.
Studies involving day-time fMRI16 and night-time PET15 have previously demonstrated that blue light disproportionately activates key right-hemisphere regions related to attention, but this is the first demonstration that these asymmetric activation patterns translate to asymmetric behavioural changes. Current models for spatial attention suggest that the distribution of attention between the hemifields is balanced by competitive activation between the hemispheres, specifically within a bilaterally represented dorsal network for spatial attention orienting1,6,7,45, that is in turn influenced by the right-hemisphere-lateralized ventral network subserving non-spatial processes including alertness1,2,46 51. This account can explain many asymmetric features of visuo-spatial attention including pseudoneglect during normal daytime alertness, reductions in responsiveness to items in left space under conditions of lower alertness, and left unilateral spatial neglect which is most common after right-hemisphere damage1. The non-visual effects of light on the brain are achieved in part via inputs from the suprachiasmatic nucleus to the locus-coeruleus (LC)13,14,52.  It is therefore possible that higher intensity blue-enriched light preferentially activates right-hemisphere attention networks through the LC/noradrenergic (LC-NA) system1,8,53, thus leading to the asymmetric behaviour-brain effects observed herein. These observations, along with the recent findings that blue light exposure improves alertness in patients with traumatic brain injuries54, offer the tantalizing, though speculative, possibility that light might be harnessed as a tool to promote attention to left space in disorders involving right-hemisphere dysfunction and leftward inattention such as unilateral spatial neglect1,3 and ADHD55,56. This must be confirmed by future research.
Methods
Participants
Data were collected from 24 (14 female) healthy right-handed volunteers, aged 19 to 25 (M = 22.6 years), reporting normal or corrected to normal vision, no history of neurological or psychiatric disorder and no head injury resulting in loss of consciousness. Ethics was obtained from the Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee (MUHREC) prior to testing. The experimental protocol was approved by MUHREC and carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines. Informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to testing.
Light intensity manipulation
Each participant was exposed to three different blue-enriched white light intensities (low: 50 lux; medium: 350 lux; high: 1400 lux - at eye level, vertical plane) across separate sessions in a counterbalanced order (72 testing sessions in total). Participants were seated in front of two identical light boxes (Philips EnergyLight HF3305, Philips Lighting, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) fitted with blue-enriched white lamps (17000K, PL-L ActiViva, Philips Lighting, Eindhoven, The Netherlands)57. One light box was placed on a table at eye level 60cm from the eyes. The other was positioned on the floor in front of the participant 45  degrees below eye level but pointing towards the eyes at a 110cm distance. Light intensity (lux) was manipulated by placing the appropriate neutral density filter  stop  over the source to modify the intensity (lux) of all wavelengths of light equally without altering the spectrum. Lux at eye level was verified via a lux meter (Testo 540). The only variable that differed between light conditions was the strength of the neutral density filter used. 
Each participant maintained a regular sleep-wake cycle (~11:00pm-~7:00am) for 7 days, with compliance confirmed both verbally and via wrist actigraphy (Actiwatch 2; Philips Respironics, Bend, Oregon, USA). Participants were instructed to avoid afternoon caffeine consumption and to maintain consistent consumption across all 7 days. On nights 5, 6 and 7 participants visited the laboratory at Monash University from 8:15pm to 10:15pm. Sessions comprised 10 minutes dark adaptation (complete blackout goggles), followed by 1 hour exposure to one of three light intensities (administered in a counterbalanced order). Subjective sleepiness was assessed directly before and after light exposure with the Karolinska Sleepiness Scale (KSS)58. Immediately following light exposure and KSS rating, participants performed the behavioural task for ~36 minutes while EEG was recorded. 
Participants were not made aware of the light intensity manipulation during testing. To evaluate their perceptions of the light conditions, they completed a questionnaire directly after their third session, which asked them to judge during which of the sessions the light intensity was (a) the brightest, (b) the least bright and (c) of medium brightness. Participants then stated their confidence in these judgments, by reporting  to what extent [they] were aware each night that the light s brightness was different to that of the other nights , on a scale from 1 to 10 (1 -  not aware at all ; 5 -  somewhat aware, but not sure of the change ; 10 -  very aware/certain of the change ). To account for the possibility that participants were aware of the light intensity manipulation, participants  judgments and confidence ratings were examined. Although 50% of participants correctly judged the order of light intensity exposure, there was no relationship between participants  accuracy in these judgements and their confidence that they were correct [incorrect mean confidence = 6.25, SD = 2.93, n = 12; correct mean confidence = 7.67, SD = 2.5, n = 12. Robust t-test alternatives were used since confidence distributions were not normal59 - bootstrapped Yuen-Welch test with 20% trimmed means and windsorized variances: t = 1.62, p = 0.083; Bayesian t-test analogue: posterior mean confidence difference = 1.49,  95% HDI = -0.94 to 3.91].  Nor was there any effect of judgment accuracy or Light intensity on change in KSS subjective sleepiness scores after light exposure [Light intensity  2(2) = 0.75, p= 0.688; Judgment Accuracy  2(2) = 0.29, p= 0.590; Light intensity   Judgment Accuracy  2(2) = 1.23,  p= 0.539]. Our finding that accuracy in judging light intensity bore no relationship to subjective sleepiness ratings as a function of light intensity, together with an absence of a relationship between accuracy and confidence, suggest the absence of any expectancy effects or demand characteristics60. 
Behavioural paradigm
Participants were seated in a darkened room, 56cm from a 21 inch CRT (85Hz, 1024 x 768 resolution) to perform a novel variant of the random dot motion (RDM) task20 22 where they fixated centrally and monitored 4 peripheral patches (one in each quadrant) of 150 moving dots for targets defined by a seamless transition from random motion to coherent motion in an upward or downward direction (see Figure 4). Upon detecting a target, participants made a speeded button press with their right index finger.  Since response hand was held constant across the three repeated-measures levels of Light, response hand cannot have influenced the key effects of Light on RT and  -power observed herein. Stimuli appeared white (RGB: 221) against a black background. The fixation mark was a central 5 5 pixel square. The circular dot patches were of 8 degrees diameter with the centre of each patch situated 6 degrees below or above and 10 degrees to the left or right of the central fixation point (see Figure 4). During random motion, 150 dots per patch (each dot 6x6 pixels) were placed at random and independent positions within each of the patches at a rate of 21.25 frames/s. During coherent motion targets, 60% of these dots were randomly selected on each frame to be displaced by a fixed distance of 0.282 degrees in either a downward or upward direction on the following frame, resulting in a motion speed of 6 degrees/s. The four dot patches and fixation mark remained on screen throughout the entire task, however dot motion paused (i.e. all dots became stationary) between trials. When dot motion was paused, stationary dots were set slightly darker (RGB: 181) to account for the absence of the 21.25 frames/s flicker. The motivation behind using relatively high dot coherence (60%) was to ensure fast RTs with relatively low variability to enable detection of subtle processing differences between left and right hemifield targets.
Participants completed 336 trials containing no fixation breaks during each session. Each trial consisted of a period of random motion (initiated on fixation and lasting 1.8, 2.8 or 3.8s) followed by a coherent motion target (terminated directly after a response or after 1s). Targets only appeared once within one of the 4 patches/quadrants on any given trial. If a fixation break occurred during a trial (either a blink or a gaze deviation >4 degrees from centre, detected via EyeLink1000, SR Research Ltd), the task paused (stationary dots), and text (dark grey, RGB: 109) appeared at fixation for 200ms reminding participants to  keep [their] eye on the spot , before the trial restarted. The 24 possible trial types (each a combination of one of the 3 periods of random motion, 4 target locations, and 2 coherent motion directions), occurred in a pseudorandom order with the constraint that each different trial type arose twice every 48 trials. Following the coherent motion target, all dots paused and remained stationary on the screen for 100ms before a  blink now  message (RGB: 109; 200ms) appeared at fixation. Stationary dots then remained onscreen for a further 400ms fixation period before the next trial began. The paradigm was run on a 32-bit windows XP machine using MATLAB (MathWorks) and the Psychophysics Toolbox extensions61 63. Paradigm scripts can be found online.

 
Figure 4. Schematic of a single trial. Participants fixated on the central dot and monitored the peripheral patches of randomly moving dots for instances of coherent motion (either upward or downward). Participants responded to motion targets via a speeded button press. Coherent motion targets only occurred in one of the four patches, once per trial. The pre-target random motion lasted either 1.8, 2.8 or 3.8 s, chosen randomly on a trial-by-trial basis.

Data processing
Data were processed using a combination of custom scripts and EEGLAB64 routines implemented in MATLAB (MathWorks). All processing scripts used for the current study can be found online (https://github.com/DanielPNewman/BlueEnrichedLightRepo). Continuous EEG was acquired from 65 scalp electrodes using a Brain Products BrainAmp DC system digitized at 500Hz. A 35Hz low-pass filter was applied offline using 4th order Butterworth filters, noisy channels were interpolated (spherical spline) and the data were re-referenced to the average reference. Epochs were then extracted from the continuous data from -700ms to 1200ms around target onset, and baselined with respect to -100 to 0ms before target onset. Power in the  -band was calculated following the methods by Thut and colleagues17. Each epoch was band-pass filtered to   range (8 - 13 Hz), rectified (converted to absolute values) and trimmed to exclude the 200 msec at the beginning and end of the epoch in order to eliminate filter warm-up artefacts. Data were then smoothed by averaging inside a moving window of 100ms, moving forward in 50ms increments. 
Electrode selection for pre-target   analysis as a function of hemisphere
Since short-wavelength light has been shown to modulate  -power at rest18 and pre-target parieto-occipital  -power is a robust marker of attentional deployment between the hemifields17, the current study focused on parieto-occipital  -power measured during the interval immediately prior to coherent motion onsets (mean -500ms to target onset). The difference in grand average  -desynchronisation elicited by left- versus right-hemifield targets indicated that lateral parieto-occipital electrodes were the most sensitive to covert shifts in attention towards each hemifield (see Figure 1B), in line with previous work17,25,40,65 69. Post-target  -desynchronisation was used to select individualized parieto-occipital electrodes for  -power analysis, ensuring   was measured from electrodes most sensitive to spatial orienting. Since light exposure asymmetrically influenced the RT measure of spatial attention orienting (Figure 1A), individualized electrodes were chosen on a per-session basis. This approach focuses on the parieto-occipital regions while permitting some variation in electrode selection between sessions to account for: (a) subtle individual differences in cap fit, scalp morphology, and cortical folding between participants, and (b) subtle differences in spatial attention processing related to the light manipulation. Four electrodes per hemisphere with maximal difference in mean post-target (50-600ms)  -desynchronisation for contralateral versus ipsilateral targets (calculated from average post-target   waveforms for each session) were selected from the 16 lateral parieto-occipital electrodes (left hemisphere P1, P3, P5, P7, PO3, PO7 PO9, O1; right-hemisphere P2, P4, P6, P8, PO4, PO8, PO10, O2).
Inferential analysis 
Inferential statistics were calculated using a combination of custom scripts and packages in R. All R scripts and data for reproduction of results can be found online (https://github.com/DanielPNewman/BlueEnrichedLightRepo ). Target detection accuracy was at ceiling (mean=97.4%). We used multilevel linear modelling and maximum likelihood ratio tests via the lme4 package70 to test for fixed effects of light intensity, target-hemifield and hemisphere on single trial measures of RT and  -power data. Follow-up contrasts were performed as appropriate using the multcomp package71. This multilevel approach was preferred over classic ANOVA methods as it accommodated dependent data due to repeated measures19 and allowed random intercepts to account for the nesting of each cerebral hemisphere (for  -power measurements) inside participants who were nested inside different Light Condition Orders (6 possible orders administered in a counterbalanced manner). To identify the final random effect structure we first followed the criteria of Barr et al.72,73 by fitting a maximal model including by-subjects random slopes of each fixed effect and crossed factors of Light Intensity (low, medium, high), Incoherent Motion Period (1.8, 2.8, 3.8 seconds), Motion Direction (upward, downward), Target Location (1 of 4 quadrants) and Trial Number (1 to 336). This maximal random effects structure failed to converge, however,  showing the maximal model was over-parameterized74,75. Therefore, we identified a parsimonious74 random effect structure using an iterative procedure76 which employed likelihood ratio tests to compare models without each particular random effect to the model including the random effect, and retained only the random effects which both improved the model fit and did not lead to failure to converge. This lead to the inclusion of by-subjects random slopes of Hemifield and pre-target alpha power, but the exclusion of random slopes of Light, when modelling RT, and the exclusion of random slopes for Light and Hemisphere when modelling pre-target alpha power. Fixed effect plots were created using the Effects and ggplot2 packages77,78.
As described above, all completed trials were uncontaminated by eye blinks or fixation breaks. Trials were excluded from analysis if: (a) RTs were < 200ms (pre-emptive responses) or >1000ms (responses after coherent motion offset); (b) broad-band (0-35Hz) EEG from any channel exceeded +/- 100 V during the interval from -500ms to 0ms before target onset for pre-target   analysis, or during the interval from -100ms before target onset to 100ms after RT for the   desynchronisation analysis which was used to select electrodes most sensitive to covert shifts in attention (see below). The distribution of single trial  -power measures had strong positive skew so they were log transformed to normality for any analysis in which  -power was the criterion/dependent variable. RT data did not require transformation. Outlying data points (greater than 3 standard deviations from the participants  conditional mean) were removed from single trial RT and  -power measures prior to inferential analysis.

Author Contributions
The experiment was conceived by D.N. and designed by D.N., S.W.L., A.M., R.A., M.O.N., M.Z. and M.A.B. The attention task was programed by S.K. with amendments made by G.L. and D.N. Data collection was performed by D.N. A.M. R.A. M.Z. and M.O.N.   Data analyses was conducted by D.N.   D.N., S.W.L., G.L., A.M.,  M.O.N., S.W., R.O.C and M.A. B wrote the manuscript. 
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by grants from the Australian Research Council (FT130101488; DP 150100986). The authors thank Petra C van den Bogert for help with data collection.

References
1.	Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G. L. Spatial neglect and attention networks. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34, 569 599 (2011).
2.	Thiebaut de Schotten, M. et al. A lateralized brain network for visuospatial attention. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1245 1246 (2011).
3.	Robertson, I. H., Mattingley, J. B., Rorden, C. & Driver, J. Phasic alerting of neglect patients overcomes their spatial deficit in visual awareness. Nature 395, 169 172 (1998).
4.	Manly, T., Dobler, V. B., Dodds, C. M. & George, M. A. Rightward shift in spatial awareness with declining alertness. Neuropsychologia 43, 1721 1728 (2005).
5.	Bareham, C. A., Manly, T., Pustovaya, O. V, Scott, S. K. & Bekinschtein, T. A. Losing the left side of the world: rightward shift in human spatial attention with sleep onset. Sci. Rep. 4, 5092 (2014).
6.	Corbetta, M., Kincade, M. J., Lewis, C., Snyder, A. Z. & Sapir, A. Neural basis and recovery of spatial attention deficits in spatial neglect. Nat. Neurosci. 8, 1603 1610 (2005).
7.	Husain, M. & Nachev, P. Space and the parietal cortex. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 30 36 (2007).
8.	Coull, J. T., Nobre, A. C. & Frith, C. D. The noradrenergic  2 agonist clonidine modulates behavioural and neuroanatomical correlates of human attentional orienting and alerting. Cereb. Cortex 11, 73 84 (2001).
9.	Posner, M. I. & Petersen, S. E. The attention system of the human brain. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 25 42 (1990).
10.	Berson, D. M., Dunn, F. A. & Takao, M. Phototransduction by retinal ganglion cells that set the circadian clock. Science 295, 1070 3 (2002).
11.	Gooley, J. J., Lu, J., Chou, T. C., Scammell, T. E. & Saper, C. B. Melanopsin in cells of origin of the retinohypothalamic tract. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 1165 (2001).
12.	Zaidi, F. H. et al. Short-Wavelength Light Sensitivity of Circadian, Pupillary, and Visual Awareness in Humans Lacking an Outer Retina. Curr. Biol. 17, 2122 2128 (2007).
13.	Aston-Jones, G., Chen, S., Zhu, Y. & Oshinsky, M. L. A Neural Circuit for Circadian Regulation of Arousal. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 732 738 (2001).
14.	Gonz lez, M. M. C. & Aston-Jones, G. Circadian regulation of arousal: role of the noradrenergic locus coeruleus system and light exposure. Sleep 29, 1327 36 (2006).
15.	Perrin, F. et al. Nonvisual responses to light exposure in the human brain during the circadian night. Curr. Biol. 14, 1842 6 (2004).
16.	Vandewalle, G. et al. Daytime light exposure dynamically enhances brain responses. Curr. Biol. 16, 1616 21 (2006).
17.	Thut, G., Nietzel, A., Brandt, S. A. & Pascual-Leone, A.  -Band electroencephalographic activity over occipital cortex indexes visuospatial attention bias and predicts visual target detection. J. Neurosci. 26, 9494 9502 (2006).
18.	Rahman, S. A. et al. Diurnal spectral sensitivity of the acute alerting effects of light. Sleep 37, 271 81 (2014).
19.	Aarts, E., Verhage, M., Veenvliet, J. V, Dolan, C. V & van der Sluis, S. A solution to dependency: using multilevel analysis to accommodate nested data. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 491 6 (2014).
20.	Kelly, S. P. & O Connell, R. G. Internal and External Influences on the Rate of Sensory Evidence Accumulation in the Human Brain. J. Neurosci. 33, 19434 19441 (2013).
21.	Newsome, W. T., Britten, K. H. & Movshon, J. A. Neuronal correlates of a perceptual decision. Nature 341, 52 54 (1989).
22.	Britten, K. H., Shadlen, M. N., Newsome, W. T. & Movshon, J. A. The analysis of visual motion: A comparison of neuronal and psychophysical performance. J. Neurosci. 12, 4745 4765 (1992).
23.	Benwell, C. S. Y., Harvey, M., Gardner, S. & Thut, G. Stimulus- and state-dependence of systematic bias in spatial attention: Additive effects of stimulus-size and time-on-task. Cortex 49, 827 836 (2013).
24.	Dodds, C. M. et al. The Effects of Time-on-Task and Concurrent Cognitive Load on Normal Visuospatial Bias. Neuropsychology 22, 545 552 (2008).
25.	Newman, D. P., O Connell, R. G. & Bellgrove, M. A. Linking time-on-task, spatial bias and hemispheric activation asymmetry: A neural correlate of rightward attention drift. Neuropsychologia 51, 1215 1223 (2013).
26.	Lockley, S. W. et al. Short-wavelength sensitivity for the direct effects of light on alertness, vigilance, and the waking electroencephalogram in humans. Sleep 29, 161 8 (2006).
27.	Boksem, M. A. S., Meijman, T. F. & Lorist, M. M. Effects of mental fatigue on attention: an ERP study. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 25, 107 16 (2005).
28.	Kamzanova,  a T., Matthews, G., Kustubayeva,  a M. & Jakupov, S. M. EEG Indices to Time-On-Task Effects and to a Workload Manipulation ( Cueing ). World Acad. Sci. Eng. Technol. 80, 19 22 (2011).
29.	Romei, V., Rihs, T., Brodbeck, V. & Thut, G. Resting electroencephalogram alpha-power over posterior sites indexes baseline visual cortex excitability. Neuroreport 19, 203 208 (2008).
30.	Sadaghiani, S. et al. Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: A simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study. J. Neurosci. 30, 10243 10250 (2010).
31.	Romei, V. et al. Spontaneous fluctuations in posterior  -band EEG activity reflect variability in excitability of human visual areas. Cereb. Cortex 18, 2010 2018 (2008).
32.	Pfurtscheller, G. Functional brain imaging based on ERD/ERS. Vision Res. 41, 1257 1260 (2001).
33.	Foxe, J. J. & Snyder, A. C. The Role of Alpha-Band Brain Oscillations as a Sensory Suppression Mechanism during Selective Attention. Front. Psychol. 2, 154 (2011).
34.	O Connell, R. G. et al. Uncovering the neural signature of lapsing attention: electrophysiological signals predict errors up to 20 s before they occur. J. Neurosci. 29, 8604 8611 (2009).
35.	Hanslmayr, S. et al. Prestimulus oscillations predict visual perception performance between and within subjects. Neuroimage 37, 1465 73 (2007).
36.	Ergenoglu, T. et al. Alpha rhythm of the EEG modulates visual detection performance in humans. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res. 20, 376 83 (2004).
37.	Van Dijk, H., Schoffelen, J. M., Oostenveld, R. & Jensen, O. Prestimulus oscillatory activity in the alpha band predicts visual discrimination ability. J. Neurosci. 28, 1816 1823 (2008).
38.	Yamagishi, N., Callan, D. E., Anderson, S. J. & Kawato, M. Attentional changes in pre-stimulus oscillatory activity within early visual cortex are predictive of human visual performance. Brain Res. 1197, 115 22 (2008).
39.	Kelly, S. P., Gomez-Ramirez, M. & Foxe, J. J. The strength of anticipatory spatial biasing predicts target discrimination at attended locations: a high-density EEG study. Eur. J. Neurosci. 30, 2224 34 (2009).
40.	Capilla, A., Schoffelen, J.-M., Paterson, G., Thut, G. & Gross, J. Dissociated  -Band Modulations in the Dorsal and Ventral Visual Pathways in Visuospatial Attention and Perception. Cereb. Cortex 1 12 (2012).
41.	Sobel, M. in Sociol. Methodol. (Leinhardt, S.) 13, 290   312 (American Sociological Association, 1982).
42.	MacKinnon, D. P., Fairchild, A. J. & Fritz, M. S. Mediation analysis. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 58, 593 614 (2007).
43.	Aeschbach, D. et al. Dynamics of the human EEG during prolonged wakefulness: evidence for frequency-specific circadian and homeostatic influences. Neurosci. Lett. 239, 121 4 (1997).
44.	Aeschbach, D. et al. Two circadian rhythms in the human electroencephalogram during wakefulness. Am. J. Physiol. 277, R1771 R1779 (1999).
45.	Corbetta, M., Patel, G. & Shulman, G. L. The Reorienting System of the Human Brain: From Environment to Theory of Mind. Neuron 58, 306 324 (2008).
46.	Culham, J. C., Cavanagh, P. & Kanwisher, N. G. Attention response functions: Characterizing brain areas using fMRI activation during parametric variations of attentional load. Neuron 32, 737 745 (2001).
47.	Schwartz, S. et al. Attentional load and sensory competition in human vision: Modulation of fMRI responses by load at fixation during task-irrelevant stimulation in the peripheral visual field. Cereb. Cortex 15, 770 786 (2005).
48.	Vuilleumier, P. et al. Abnormal Attentional Modulation of Retinotopic Cortex in Parietal Patients with Spatial Neglect. Curr. Biol. 18, 1525 1529 (2008).
49.	Paus, T. et al. Time-related changes in neural systems underlying attention and arousal during the performance of an auditory vigilance task. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9, 392 408 (1997).
50.	Sturm, W. & Willmes, K. On the functional neuroanatomy of intrinsic and phasic alertness. Neuroimage 14, S76 S84 (2001).
51.	Coull, J. T., Frackowiak, R. S. J. & Frith, C. D. Monitoring for target objects: Activation of right frontal and parietal cortices with increasing time on task. Neuropsychologia 36, 1325 1334 (1998).
52.	Vandewalle, G. et al. Brain responses to violet, blue, and green monochromatic light exposures in humans: prominent role of blue light and the brainstem. PLoS One 2, e1247 (2007).
53.	Robinson, R. G. Lateralized behavioral and neurochemical consequences of unilateral brain injury in rats. Cereb. Lateralization Nonhum. Species 135 156 (1985).
54.	Sinclair, K. L., Ponsford, J. L., Taffe, J., Lockley, S. W. & Rajaratnam, S. M. W. Randomized controlled trial of light therapy for fatigue following traumatic brain injury. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 28, 303 13 (2014).
55.	Bellgrove, M. A., Eramudugolla, R., Newman, D. P., Vance, A. & Mattingley, J. B. Influence of attentional load on spatial attention in acquired and developmental disorders of attention. Neuropsychologia 51, 1085 1093 (2013).
56.	Chan, E. et al. Abnormal spatial asymmetry of selective attention in ADHD. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 50, 1064 1072 (2009).
57.	Brainard, G. C. et al. Short-wavelength enrichment of polychromatic light enhances human melatonin suppression potency. J. Pineal Res. 58, 352 61 (2015).
58.	Akerstedt, T. & Gillberg, M. Subjective and objective sleepiness in the active individual. Int. J. Neurosci. 52, 29 37 (1990).
59.	Lakens, D. (2015). The perfect t-test (version 1.0.0). URL https://github.com/Lakens/perfect-t-test.
60.	Orne, M. T. in Artifacts Behav. Res. Robert Rosenthal Ralph L. Rosnow s Class. Books (Rosenthal, R., Rosnow, R. & Kazdin, A.) 110 (Oxford University Press, USA, 2009).
61.	Brainard, D. H. The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spat. Vis. 10, 433 436 (1997).
62.	Cornelissen, F. W., Peters, E. M. & Palmer, J. The Eyelink Toolbox: eye tracking with MATLAB and the Psychophysics Toolbox. Behav. Res. Methods. Instrum. Comput. 34, 613 7 (2002).
63.	Pelli, D. G. The VideoToolbox software for visual psychophysics: transforming numbers into movies. Spat. Vis. 10, 437 42 (1997).
64.	Delorme, A. & Makeig, S. EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. J. Neurosci. Methods 134, 9 21 (2004).
65.	Gould, I. C., Rushworth, M. F. & Nobre, A. C. Indexing the graded allocation of visuospatial attention using anticipatory alpha oscillations. J. Neurophysiol. 105, 1318 1326 (2011).
66.	Loughnane, G. M., Shanley, J. P., Lalor, E. C. & O Connell, R. G. Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence of opposing lateral visuospatial asymmetries in the upper and lower visual fields. Cortex 63, 220 231 (2015).
67.	Sauseng, P. et al. A shift of visual spatial attention is selectively associated with human EEG alpha activity. Eur. J. Neurosci. 22, 2917 2926 (2005).
68.	Ter Huurne, N. et al. Behavioral consequences of aberrant alpha lateralization in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 74, 227 33 (2013).
69.	Worden, M. S., Foxe, J. J., Wang, N. & Simpson, G. V. Anticipatory biasing of visuospatial attention indexed by retinotopically specific alpha-band electroencephalography increases over occipital cortex. J. Neurosci. 20, (2000).
70.	Bates, D., M chler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using {lme4}. J. Stat. Softw. 67, 1 48 (2015).
71.	Hothorn, T., Bretz, F. & Westfall, P. Simultaneous Inference in General Parametric Models. Biometrical J. 50, 346 363 (2008).
72.	Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C. & Tily, H. J. Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. J. Mem. Lang. 68, 255 278 (2013).
73.	Barr, D. J. Random effects structure for testing interactions in linear mixed-effects models. Front. Psychol. 4, 328 (2013).
74.	Bates, D. M., Kliegl, R., Vasishth, S. & Baayen, H. Parsimonious Mixed Models. arXiv 1506.04967, (2015).
75.	Matuschek, H., Kliegl, R., Vasishth, S., Baayen, H. & Bates, D. M. Balancing Type I Error and Power in Linear Mixed Models. arXiv 1511.01864, (2015).
76.	Tremblay, A., University, D. & Ransijn, J. (2015) LMERConvenienceFunctions: Model Selection and Post-hoc Analysis for (G)LMER Models. URL https://cran.r-project.org/package=LMERConvenienceFunctions
77.	Fox, J. Effect Displays in {R} for Generalised Linear Models. J. Stat. Softw. 8, 1 27 (2003).
78.	Wickham, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. (Springer-Verlag New York, 2009).


Preamble to peer reviewed paper 4
Previous research suggests that the subtle asymmetries in attention that have been the focus of this thesis are also related to inter-hemispheric asymmetries in dopamine signalling in healthy humans and across species. Work by the candidate, published directly before the start of this candidature (Newman et al., 2012; see Appendix 2 for a copy of the publication), reported an effect of a tandem repeat polymorphism of the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1; SLC6A3) on lateralised target detections in non-clinical adults, where participants were not required to select a target from amongst competing distractors, making it unclear whether the results merely reflect an asymmetry of response selection rather than a specific asymmetry of attentional selection. This chapter aimed to adjudicate between the effects of the DAT1 3 UTR VNTR in attentional versus response selection. 
This chapter comprises data from a sample of healthy adults (N=518) who performed three behavioural tasks that varied in the degree to which they required participants to resolve attentional, or response, competition. They were genotyped for the DAT1 3 UTR tandem repeat polymorphism which is thought to influence the level of available synaptic dopamine and confer risk to disorders of inattention.  Compared to individuals who were heterozygous or homozygous for the 10-repeat allele of the polymorphism, individuals without this allele demonstrated an immunity to distraction in the left hemifield.  Response times in this genotype group were unaffected by increases in the number of distractor stimuli when these distractors were presented predominantly to the left hemi-field.
These data suggest that participants without the 10-repeat allele of the DAT1 tandem repeat polymorphism possess enhanced ability to filter task-irrelevant stimuli in the left-hemifield, supporting the view that spatial attentional asymmetry is not only influenced by  state  factors such as alertness, but also by  trait  like individual differences in the dopaminergic system. 

NOTE: please see Appendix 3 for supplemental material related to this chapter and referred to in the published paper below. 

Dopamine transporter genotype is associated with a lateralised resistance to distraction during attention selection

Daniel P. Newman1
Tarrant D.R. Cummins1
Janette H.S. Tong1
Beth P. Johnson1
Hayley Pickering1
Peter Fanning1
Joseph Wagner2
Jack T.T. Goodrich2
Ziarih Hawi1
Christopher D. Chambers3
Mark A. Bellgrove1,2

	Monash University, School of Psychological Sciences, Clayton, Australia
	The University of Queensland, Queensland Brain Institute (QBI) and School of Psychology, Brisbane, Australia
	Cardiff University, School of Psychology, Wales, UK

Address correspondence to:
Prof Mark A. Bellgrove
School of Psychological Sciences
Monash University
Melbourne, Australia, 3800
Email: mark.bellgrove@monash.edu
Ph: +61 3 9902 4200

Number of pages: 27
Number of figures: 2
Number of Tables: 1 
Number of words for Abstract: 243; Introduction: 494, Discussion: 1500

Running Title:  Dopamine transporter gene and selective attention
Abstract
Although lateral asymmetries in orienting behaviour are evident across species and have been linked to inter-hemispheric asymmetries in dopamine signalling, the relative contribution of attentional versus motoric processes remains unclear.  Here we took a cognitive genetic approach to adjudicate between roles for dopamine in attentional versus response selection.  A sample of non-clinical adult humans (N=518) performed three cognitive tasks (spatial attentional competition, spatial cuing and flanker tasks) that varied in the degree to which they required participants to resolve attentional or response competition. All participants were genotyped for two putatively functional tandem repeat polymorphisms of the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1; SLC6A3) which are argued to influence the level of available synaptic dopamine and confer risk to disorders of inattention.  DAT1 genotype modulated the task-specific effects of the various task-irrelevant stimuli across both the spatial competition and spatial cuing but not flanker tasks.  Specifically, compared to individuals carrying one or two copies of the 10-repeat DAT1 allele, individuals without this allele demonstrated an immunity to distraction, such that response times were unaffected by increases in the number of distractor stimuli, particularly when these were presented predominantly in the left hemi-field.  All three genotype groups exhibited uniform costs of resolving leftward response selection in a standard flanker task. None of these significant effects could be explained by speed/accuracy trade-offs suggesting that participants without the 10-repeat allele of the DAT1 tandem repeat polymorphism possess an enhanced attentional ability to suppress task-irrelevant stimuli in the left hemi-field.
 
Introduction
Convergent evidence from human and animal pharmacology shows that cholinergic (Voytko et al., 1994; Witte et al., 1997) and noradrenergic (Coull et al., 2001) mechanisms modulate behavioural and neural indices of selective attention.  Although pharmacological evidence also supports a role for dopamine in selective attention (Clark et al., 1989), dissociating its effects on response selection versus attentional selection has proven controversial (Ward and Brown, 1996).  Here we show that DNA variation in a putatively functional dopamine polymorphism is associated with enhanced attentional selection, particularly for stimuli presented within the left hemi-field.  
Damage to one cerebral hemisphere can induce hemi-spatial neglect where responses to contralesional stimuli are impaired. In humans, left neglect after right-hemisphere damage is more frequent and severe than right neglect after left-hemisphere damage  (Driver and Mattingley, 1998).  Consistent with animal studies that report spatial inattention after ascending dopaminergic pathways lesions (Iversen, 1984), dopamine agonists reduce the extent of spatial inattention in neurological (Fleet et al., 1987; Gorgoraptis et al., 2012) and psychiatric disorders (Maruff et al., 1995). Ward and Brown (1996) however examined the impact of unilateral dopamine-depleting lesions on covert orienting in rats.  Although unilateral dopamine depletion slowed response times contralateral to the lesion, responses to validly and invalidly cued targets did not differ.  These authors concluded that striatal dopamine influences response but not selective attention processes.  
A small number of studies have reported that DNA polymorphisms of the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) are associated with asymmetries of spatial attention (Bellgrove et al., 2005, 2007, 2008, 2009; Newman et al., 2012; Zozulinsky et al., 2014).  The 10-repeat allele of a variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism within the 3  untranslated region of DAT1 is an established susceptibility locus for ADHD.  In vitro and human in vivo experiments suggest this variant is associated with increased expression of the transporter which could reduce available synaptic dopamine (Heinz et al., 2000; Fuke et al., 2001; Cheon et al., 2005; VanNess et al., 2005; Brookes et al., 2006, 2007).  Allelic variation within both this VNTR, and an intron 8 VNTR, has been associated with asymmetries of selective attention in children with and without ADHD (Bellgrove et al., 2007, 2009).  Although Newman et al. (2012) reported an influence of the DAT1 3 UTR VNTR on lateralised target detections in non-clinical adults, participants were not required to select a target from amongst competing distractors, making it unclear whether the results merely reflect an asymmetry of response selection rather than a specific asymmetry of attentional selection. 
We took a cognitive genetic approach to adjudicate between roles for dopamine in attentional versus response selection, employing three paradigms with varying requirements for resolving attentional competition versus response competition.  If DAT1 genotype is associated with response selection mechanisms (lateralized or not), then global differences in speed should exist across tasks and DAT1 genotype.  If however DAT1 genotype is linked to lateralized attentional selection, then DAT1 genotype should influence the suppression of task-irrelevant stimuli, particularly when distraction arises in the left hemi-field.  

Materials and Methods
Participants
Participants (N=532) were recruited and tested at either the University of Queensland (n=379) or Monash University (n=153) using identical procedures and a  cohort  factor was included as a covariate in all analyses to control for any subtle differences between testing locations. Healthy right-handed participants were included in the current analysis if they (a) completed all three tasks, (b) were of Caucasian background and (c) had completed the Cognitive Failures Questionnaire (CFQ) and Conners' Adult ADHD Rating Scales (CAARS) - self-report scales that screened for sub-threshold attention deficits, and (d) were successfully genotyped for the 3 -UTR and intron 8 VNTRs of the DAT1 gene. These selection criteria resulted in the inclusion of 518 (270 females and 248 males) of the 532 participants (see Table 1 for genotype specific demographics).  
Cognitive Tasks
The three cognitive tasks (see spatial competition, spatial cueing and flanker tasks below) were presented in a dimly lit room on an 85Hz 12   16-inch CRT monitor positioned at a viewing distance of 65 cm (stimulus visual angle 3.6    3.3 ). Participants were instructed to horizontally align themselves with a fixation cross (+) that was presented in the centre of the screen and to make responses via a standard Dell QWERTY keyboard with USB connection. Although use of a keyboard for recording responses introduces some timing imprecision, empirical and modelling research shows that this additional error variability does not affect statistical outcomes for research designs such as that used here, where repeated-measures experimental comparisons are emphasised (see Damian, 2010; Brand and Bradley, 2012). The tasks were presented in counterbalanced order across participants with optional rest breaks of up to 60 seconds between each task block. Participants were always instructed to maintain fixation and were reminded that the tasks were easiest to perform when fixation was maintained. The task requirements are detailed below and the temporal parameters of each task can be seen Figure 1.

Horizontal saccadic latency (the duration between the appearance of a target and the onset of the eye movement) for healthy adults is typically 200-250ms in  overlap paradigms  where the central fixation point remains visible up to and during the time the target appears (Yang et al., 2006), as was the case in the spatial competition and cueing tasks (Figures 1A and 1B). Although eye-tracking data was not collected here, there was not enough time for participants to onset an eye movement towards the target as it was displayed for only 150ms in the spatial competition and spatial cueing tasks. In the spatial competition task (in which the largest lateralised DAT1 effect was observed) the participants had no prior information about the location of the forthcoming target and so had no information to illicit a pre-target fixation break. In the spatial cuing task the cue-to-target duration (or SOA) was 150ms which is too short to allow an eye movement towards the cue prior to target onset.  Since the critical dependent measure in the spatial cuing task was the reorienting cost (from irrelevant cues), it is highly unlikely that eye movements could account for the lateralised effect on the spatial cuing task.
Spatial Competition Task
The spatial competition task began with the simultaneous presentation of a fixation cross and an array of 16 circular placeholders (white outlines) of 2cm diameter that were arranged to form a global circle (15cm diameter) on a black background. To challenge attentional selection mechanisms targets appeared surrounded by either 3 or 7 distractors, corresponding to total set-sizes of 4 and 8, respectively. The target in each trial was an upright or inverted  T  and the distractors were plus signs ( + ). The distractors were presented in either the same hemi-field as the target (unilateral) or in both the same and the opposite hemi-field (bilateral) (Figure 1A shows a bilateral 8 condition). Equal numbers of each of these trial types were presented in pseudorandom order. During each trial the target could appear within any circle (counterbalanced for left and right appearance across trials). Participants indicated the orientation of the target by using their right index and middle fingers, respectively to press  1  for upright or  2  for inverted on the number pad of the keyboard. Stimuli arrays varied in regards to both the number and spatial layout of distractors. Participants were presented with three practice blocks of 32 trials followed by 8 test blocks of 40 trials (320 in total). Feedback (correct, incorrect) was given in practice blocks only.
The spatial competition task was devised to assay attentional selection. Although overall increases in response time with set-size were expected, we were interested in testing the specific prediction that DAT1 genotype was linked to a lateralized attentional selection mechanism.  This hypothesis was tested by comparing the  set-size effect , operationalized as the behavioural cost of additional distractors that were presented predominantly in the left or predominantly in the right hemi-field.
Spatial Cueing Task 
The spatial cueing task was an exogenous covert orienting task based on the cued target detection task of Posner et al. (1984), a paradigm that has been widely used to assess spatial attention. Covert orienting was encouraged by instructing participants to focus on a fixation cross which was present for the entire duration of each trial. After presenting the fixation cross alone, 4 circular placeholders (white outline) of 2cm diameter were displayed in a square arrangement against a black background.   Cues consisted of a 100% increase in luminance of some or all of the placeholders. Cues either appeared on the same side as the target (valid), the opposite side of the target (invalid) or gave no information regarding the spatial location of the upcoming target (neutral - all 4 placeholders  illuminated ) (see Figure 1B for an example of a valid trial). Equal numbers of each of these trial types were presented in pseudorandom order. In each trial a single target (an upright or inverted  T ) appeared in one of the placeholders on a given side of the array (counterbalanced across trials for vertical arrangement and for occurrence on left and right). A distractor stimulus ( + ) was presented at the other placeholder location within the same hemi-field as the target.  Participants were instructed to indicate the orientation of the target as per the competition task. Participants completed three practice blocks of 24 trials (72 in total) followed by eight test blocks of 36 trials (288 in total).   For the spatial cueing task, two primary dependent measures were calculated: the behavioural cost of reorienting attention to the target from left or right cues ( reorienting cost : invalid vs. bilateral), and the behavioural benefit of having oriented attention validly toward the target due to left or right cues ( orienting benefit : bilateral vs. valid)
Flanker Task 
Participants completed a flanker task (Eriksen and Yeh, 1985; Eriksen and St.James, 1986) comprised of a single practice block of 36 trials and eight test blocks of 36 trials each (288 test trials in total). In each trial participants made a directional response (left or right) to a central target arrow while ignoring four flanking distractors (Figure 1C). Relative to the direction of the central target, the set of flankers provided information that was either: congruent (same-facing arrows), incongruent (opposite-facing arrows) or neutral (lines without arrowheads). Equal numbers of each of these trial types were presented in pseudorandom order. Participants indicated the direction of the central arrow in each trial with their index fingers using the Z (left) and M (right) keys of the keyboard, with emphasis on both speed and accuracy.  The flanker task was employed to challenge response competition and the critical measure was the behavioural cost of overcoming incongruent flankers ( incongruence cost : incongruent vs. neutral) according to the flanker direction (left, right).

Genotyping 
Saliva was collected from each participant for DNA extraction using Oragene DNA self-collection kits (DNAgenotek, Ottawa, ON, Canada).  DNA was extracted following the protocol provided by the supplier.  Participants were genotyped for the 3 -UTR and intron 8 VNTRs of the DAT1 gene (SLC6A3). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the DAT1-3  UTR marker was performed using the following primers (50ng each): (forward: 5 -TGTGGTGTAGGGAACGGCCTGAG-3 ; reverse 5 -CTTCCTGGAGGTCACGGCTCAAGG-3 ).  The following PCR cycling protocol was adopted: Initial denaturation at 94 C for 2 mins, followed by 45 cycles of denaturation at 94 C for 15 secs, annealing at 62 C for 15 secs and extension at 72 C for 45 secs, with a final 5 min extension at 72 C.
PCR of the DAT1-intron 8 VNTR was performed using the following primers (50ng each): (forward: 5 -CTCAGCTTCCTCATGTGCCT-3 ; reverse 5 -GCAGAAACAAGGAGGAGCAG-3 ).  The following PCR cycling protocol was adopted: Initial denaturation at 98 C for 30 secs, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 98 C for 10 secs, annealing at 65 C for 30 secs and extension at 72 C for 15 secs. A final 10 min extension at 72 C was also added. All amplification products were visualized on 1.5% agarose gels.   For the 3 -UTR and intron 8 DAT1 VNTRs, grouping variables were coded based on the presence of the functional 10-repeat and 6-repeat alleles, respectively.  The frequency of the 10-repeat allele of the 3 -UTR VNTR was 75%, with 36, 182 and 300 individuals possessing zero, one or two copies of the 10-repeat, respectively.  The frequency of the 6-repeat allele of the intron 8 VNTR was 80%, with 24, 167 and 336 individuals possessing zero, one or two copies of the 6-repeat, respectively. All genotypes for both VNTRs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.  Haplotypes comprising the 10- and 6-repeat alleles from each marker were derived using PHASE version 2.1(Stephens et al., 2001; Stephens and Donnelly, 2003).  Possession of the 10/6 DAT1 haplotype is a risk factor for ADHD and has been linked to asymmetries of spatial attention in children with and without ADHD (Bellgrove et al., 2007, 2009).  For statistical analysis individuals were classified as possessing zero, one or two copies of the 10- or 6-repeat alleles of the VNTRs or of the 10/6 DAT1 haplotype.

Results
Influence of DAT1 gene variants on demographic and self-report variables
A one-way ANOVA revealed a significant effect of DAT1 3 -UTR genotype group on mean CAARS ADHD index scores [F(2,362)=2.6, p=.02], consistent with past reports of an association between increasing copies of the 10-repeat DAT1 allele and ADHD-like behaviour in both clinical and population-based samples  (Cook Jr et al., 1995; Cornish et al., 2005).  To optimise the sensitivity of the genetic comparisons, all analyses were controlled simultaneously for potential (sub-threshold) group differences in variables that could potentially influence either attention or response selection. These covariates included gender, CAARS ADHD index, and everyday inattention assessed using the CFQ and recruitment cohort (University of Queensland, Monash University).  Descriptive statistics concerning these covariates as a function of all genetic markers are seen in Table 1.  We note that we re-ran the analysis for our key findings without the use of covariates, in line with the recommendation of Simmons et al. (2011). This revealed that the key effects reported below hold when covariates are not used in the analysis. This re-analysis can be accessed online.

Omnibus Task-component Analyses
An initial 3 x 4 x 2 mixed ANCOVA of RT included the between-subjects factor of DAT1 3 -UTR genotype group (zero, one or two 10-repeat alleles) and within-subjects factors of Task-Component (set-size effect, reorienting cost, orienting benefit, incongruence cost), and Task-Irrelevant Stimulus Laterality (left, right). This analysis revealed a significant DAT1 x Stimulus Laterality interaction [F(2,511)=4.9, p=.008,  _p^2=.02 ] resembling to some extent previous reports of an association between DAT1 genotype and a spatial bias in response to lateralized stimuli (e.g. Newman et al., 2012).  Critically however this was qualified by a significant three-way interaction of DAT1 x Task-Component x Stimulus Laterality [F(6,1533)=2.6, p=.017,  _p^2=.01] indicating that DAT1 genotype modulated task-specific effects of the various task-irrelevant stimuli on RT.  The same analysis for %Errors revealed no DAT1 x Task-Component x Stimulus Laterality interaction [F(6,1533)=.59, p=.74]. 
Separate task-specific analyses of RT were undertaken below to identify the source of the significant three-way interaction. For completeness, and to ensure that any observed effects on RT were not due to speed-accuracy trade-offs, the same follow-up analyses were also undertaken on %Errors.  We note that the equivalent analyses focusing on the influence of the 6-repeat allele of the intron 8 DAT1 VNTR and the 10/6 haplotype derived from both DAT1 VNTRs were non-significant [RT intron8 : F(6,1560)=.76, p=0.61; RT haplotype : F(6, 1166.4)=2.0, p=0.08; %Errors intron8 : F(6,1560)=0.41, p=0.88; %Errors haplotype : F(6, 1515)=0.90, p=0.49].  For this reason all further analysis focused on the association with the 10-repeat allele of the DAT1 3 -UTR VNTR. 
Spatial Competition Task 
To identify the source of the significant interaction between DAT1 3 -UTR x Task-Component x Stimulus Laterality reported in the omnibus analysis above, we first analysed the spatial competition RT data, testing the influence of DAT1 genotype as a function of distractor hemi-field on the critical measure of set-size effect (set-size 8 minus set-size 4). The DAT1 x Distractor Hemi-field (predominantly left vs. predominantly right hemi-field) x Display Type (unilateral, bilateral) ANCOVA revealed a significant interaction of DAT1 genotype and distractor hemi-field for the set-size effect [F(2,511)=5.5, p=.004,  _p^2=.02] and no other significant effect involving DAT1. For right hemi-field distractors, the set-size effect did not differ significantly between the zero 10-repeat (M=40.8ms, SE=8.8), one 10-repeat (M=41.3ms, SE=3.9ms) and two DAT1 10-repeats groups (M=34.3ms, SE=3.0ms; all p>.49). For left distractors, however, the set-size effect was significantly smaller in the zero 10-repeat group (M=3.6ms, SE=9.1ms) than in both the one 10-repeat (M=32.3ms, SE=4.0ms; p=.004, d=.53) and two DAT1 10-repeat groups (M=34ms, SE=3.1ms; p=.005, d=.56), which did not differ significantly from each other (p=.75; see Figure 2A). Bootstrapping (10,000 samples) the sampling distribution of the simple effect of DAT1 genotype for left hemi-field distractors confirmed that the set-size effect was significantly smaller in the zero 10-repeat group than in both the one 10-repeat (95% CI for difference -46.5 to -9.5) and two DAT1 10-repeat groups (95% CI for difference -46.9 to -12.1).  These analyses of the set-size effect on RT thus indicate an enhanced resistance to left-sided distraction in participants with zero copies of the DAT1 10-repeat allele. Figures depicting absolute RT values for the spatial competition task, as opposed to the set-size effect can be accessed online.


To confirm that the resistance to distraction in the zero DAT1 10-repeat group reflected a true performance benefit rather than a speed-accuracy trade-off, the same analysis of set-size effects was undertaken on %Errors (Figure 2B). The set-size effects in all conditions were consistently between 11-13% and did not differ significantly between the DAT1 groups for left or right distractors (all p>.27). Nevertheless, it is notable that for left-hemi-field distractors, the zero DAT1 10-repeat group had a numerically reduced (rather than increased) set-size effect (M=11.5%, SE=1.3%) relative to the one 10-repeat (M=12.0%, SE=0.6%) and two DAT1 10-repeat groups (M=12.6%, SE=0.5%). Thus the resistance to left-hemi-field distraction for the zero DAT1 10-repeat group shown in the RT data of cannot be explained by a speed-accuracy trade-off.  Although there was no additional interaction with the factor of Display Type (unilateral, bilateral), for transparency the above DAT1 by distractor hemi-field interaction is plotted separately for unilateral and bilateral displays and can be accessed online. 

Spatial Cueing Task
Again, to identify the locus of the significant omnibus effect for RT, analyses of the spatial cuing data considered separately the reorienting costs and orienting benefits afforded by left and right cues, relative to the bilateral cuing condition. Figures depicting absolute RT values for the cueing task, as opposed to the reorienting costs and orienting benefits, can be accessed online.
Reorienting Cost
For RT (Figure 2B), the average reorienting cost was generally lower in the zero DAT1 10-repeat group compared with the other groups.  Specifically, the cost of reorienting from left cues in the zero 10-repeat group (M=22.9, SE=10.5) was significantly reduced relative to the one 10-repeat group (M=50.2, SE=4.6, p=0.018, d=0.31) and tended to differ in the same direction from the two 10-repeat group (M=41.6, SE=3.6, p=0.09, d=0.30).  There were no DAT genotype effects for right cues (all p>0.5). Bootstrapping (10,000 samples) the sampling distribution of the simple effect of DAT1 genotype confirmed that the cost of reorienting from invalid left hemi-field cues was significantly reduced for the zero 10-repeat group relative to the one 10-repeat group (95% CI for difference -45.8 to -9.1) and two DAT1 10-repeat groups (95% CI for difference -35.6 to -1.6).  
The reorienting cost for %Errors did not differ as a function of DAT1 genotype for left cues (all p>0.1).  For the right cues, the reorienting cost in the zero 10-repeat group (M=-0.85 %, SE=1.3) was significantly reduced relative to those with one 10-repeat (M=2.3 %, SE=.56, p=0.026, d=0.41), while the difference between one and two 10-repeat (M=1.3 %, SE=.44) groups did not differ (p=0.182).
Orienting Benefit
There was no significant effect of DAT1 3 UTR genotype on orienting benefit for either RT or %Errors for either left or right cues.  

Flanker Task
Analysis of both RT and %Errors for the critical measure of incongruence cost for left and right distractors, revealed no significant effects involving the DAT1 3 UTR VNTR (Figure 2C). Figures depicting absolute RT values for the flanker task, as opposed to the incongruence cost, can be accessed online.
Additional Control Analysis
These results suggest that subjects with zero copies of the 10-repeat allele of the DAT1 3 UTR VNTR benefit from enhanced attentional selection, being particularly efficient a suppressing task-irrelevant stimuli presented in the left hemi-field.   To what extent, however, might this effect result from a generalised impediment of stimulus processing in the left hemi-field? In other words, might zero 10-repeat subjects also be impaired at detecting task-relevant stimuli in the left hemi-field?
The analyses so far indicate that this is unlikely.  If subjects were impaired at processing all stimuli in the left hemi-field, then the cost of reorienting from right cues (and thus toward left targets) should be greater in the zero DAT1 10-repeat group compared to the other DAT1 genotype groups; however, the opposite trend was in fact observed (Figure 2B).  Nevertheless, to confirm directly that the observed suppressive effects were specific to task-irrelevant stimuli, two additional analyses were conducted. 
First, in the spatial competition task we compared performance for left targets between the three genotype groups, collapsing across all other conditions. Second, in the spatial cueing task we compared performance for left targets on trials with bilateral (neutral) cues between the groups. In both cases, a non-specific suppression of all stimuli in the left hemi-field would predict slower responses in the zero DAT1 10-repeat group compared with the other genotype groups. On the other hand, an enhancement of attentional selection would predict either no difference, or the opposite effect, namely, faster responses to task-relevant stimuli presented in the  enhanced  hemi-field.
For the spatial competition task, a one-way ANCOVA of mean RT to left targets (additionally co-varying for error rates to left targets) revealed a marginal main effect of DAT1 group [F(2,511)=2.6, p=.076,  _p^2=.010], driven by faster responses in the zero DAT1 10-repeat group (M=672ms, SE=20ms) compared with the one 10-repeat (M=721ms, SE=9ms; p=.028, d=.41) and two 10-repeat groups (M=719ms, SE=7ms; p=.029, d=.39). For the spatial cueing task, the same analysis for left targets on bilateral trials (again additionally co-varying for error rates to left targets) revealed no significant main effect of DAT1 group [F(2,511)=2.06, p=.129,  _p^2=.008], but pairwise comparisons show the zero DAT1 10-repeat group had numerically faster responses (M=618ms, SE=19ms) compared with both the one 10-repeat (M=657ms, SE=8ms; p=.06, d=.35) and two 10-repeat groups (M=658ms, SE=7ms; p=.045, d=.36). These findings thus rule out a generalised impairment of stimulus processing in the left hemi-field and indicate that individuals who do not possess the 10-repeat allele of the DAT1 3 UTR VNTR demonstrate a selective enhancement in suppressing task-irrelevant stimuli; i.e. a left hemi-field enhancement of attention.
 
Discussion
This study provides evidence that allelic variation in a common polymorphism of the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) mediates aspects of attentional but not response selection.  Compared to individuals carrying DAT1 variants that increase risk for psychiatric disorder (Brookes et al., 2006; Guindalini et al., 2006), individuals lacking this same variant displayed a remarkable resistance to task-irrelevant distracting stimuli when these appeared predominantly in the left hemi-field. These results cannot be explained in terms of a speed/accuracy trade-off, a generalised impairment of stimulus processing in the left hemi-field, or by a leftward bias in response selection.  Instead, our study provides evidence of a genetically mediated enhancement in suppressing task-irrelevant distraction in the left hemi-field.
	The primary question under study here was whether genetic variation in the DAT1 gene was linked to a lateralized attentional but not response selection mechanism. To assay attentional selection, participants completed the spatial competition task (Figure 1A). When distractors were predominantly in the right hemi-field, each of the DAT1 genotype groups displayed the expected set-size effect, with RT being slower at larger compared to smaller set-sizes. This indicates invariance as a function of DAT1 genotype in the ability to reject distracting information arising predominantly from the right hemi-field. In contrast, we observed a significant effect of DAT1 genotype on the set-size effect when distractors were presented predominantly in the left hemi-field, irrespective of whether the display type was unilateral or bilateral. This effect arose because those individuals without the 10-repeat DAT1 allele displayed a diminished set-size effect for displays with predominantly left-sided distractors. These results indicate that individuals without the 10-repeat DAT1 allele have a specific advantage in distinguishing relevant from irrelevant information in the left but not right hemi-field.
We tested the generality of our DAT1-mediated attentional selection hypothesis using data from a Posner cuing task, in which the data were again coded according to the hemi-field of the task-irrelevant stimulus (cue). We derived costs and benefits afforded by left and right cues relative to the bilateral cuing condition. In line with the data from the attentional competition task we observed reduced reorienting costs from left cues in individuals without the 10-repeat DAT1 allele compared with individuals possessing this allele. These data accord with the hypothesis that task-irrelevant information presented in the left hemi-field have diminished salience and therefore reduced potential to slow reorienting in individuals who do not possess the 10-repeat DAT1 allele. In contrast to the effects of DAT1 genotype on the selective attention tasks described above, no significant effects of DAT1 genotype were observed for the Flanker Task. All DAT1 genotype groups displayed a pronounced flanker incongruence cost, irrespective of whether the flanking stimulus primed a left compared to right motor response. Taken together the results of this study suggest that DAT1 genotype mediates a lateralized attentional, but not response, selection mechanism.
	So what might be the mechanism by which DNA variation in a dopamine gene differentially impacts attentional selection mechanisms between the hemi-fields?  A large amount of data now suggests that asymmetries within the dopamine system may give rise to lateral differences in behaviour.  First, it is well established that animals exhibit spontaneous orienting behavior that is consistent within the individual and is linked to asymmetries in striatal dopamine.  For example, Glick and Shapiro (1985) have shown that animals spontaneously orient contralaterally to the striatum with higher dopamine levels.  Furthermore, Gordon et al. (1994) demonstrated that orienting behaviour in rodents was linked to lower dopamine transporter (DAT) reuptake, and thus higher levels of synaptic dopamine, in the striatum contralateral to the preferred orienting direction.  Second, a number of studies in humans have demonstrated that dopamine agonists including methylphenidate which inhibits reuptake of dopamine via DAT, remediate the pathological inattention to left space that is seen in patients with hemi-spatial neglect and children with ADHD (Fleet et al., 1987; Grujic et al., 1998; Sheppard et al., 1999; Gorgoraptis et al., 2012; Silk et al., 2014).  Third, Tomer et al. (2012) have recently reported that perceptual asymmetries measured using a free-viewing perceptual task (the Greyscales Task) in healthy adult participants were tightly correlated with asymmetric binding of dopamine D2 receptors in the striatum, such that spatial bias was directed contralaterally to the hemisphere with higher D2 receptor binding.  These studies clearly establish a link between perceptual biases and striatal dopamine asymmetries, with relatively higher available dopamine in one hemisphere promoting directed attention to the contralateral hemi-field.
In accordance with the above, a number of previous studies have reported associations between the DAT1 10-repeat allele and perceptual biases, most typically measured using clinical tests of hemi-spatial neglect, such as the Landmark Task.  Bellgrove et al. (2005, 2008) asked children with ADHD to perform the Landmark Task in which they were required to judge which end of a pre-bisected line was shorter.  Children with ADHD carrying two copies of the DAT1 10-repeat allele displayed a neglect-like perceptual bias to right, indicative of weaker right hemisphere function.  In contrast, ADHD individuals heterozygous for the DAT1 10-repeat allele displayed a perceptual bias to the left.  Further, Newman et al., (2012) observed a perceptual advantage for the left hemi-field in individuals heterozygous for the DAT1 10-repeat allele , with faster detection of targets in the left compared to the right hemi-field. Homozygosity for the 10-repeat allele was associated with a relative loss of this leftward advantage.   This association between the 10-repeat DAT1 allele and a rightward spatial bias was recently replicated in a sample of healthy adults by Zozulinsky et al. (2014). 
Both in vitro gene reporter and human in vivo brain imaging work provide evidence that the 10-repeat allele of the DAT1 3 UTR may be associated with increased DAT expression / binding (Heinz et al., 2000; Fuke et al., 2001; Cheon et al., 2005; VanNess et al., 2005).  It should be noted however, that other studies have either failed to confirm an association with DAT1 genotype or have not supported the direction of the association reported above (Michelhaugh et al., 2001; Mill et al., 2002; Miller and Madras, 2002).  Nevertheless, based upon past cognitive genetic data (Bellgrove et al., 2005, 2007, 2008, 2009; Newman et al., 2012; Zozulinsky et al., 2014) and that reported herein, it is plausible that the 10-repeat DAT1 allele is associated with relatively lower available dopamine in the right hemisphere which would promote a rightward perceptual bias.  Indeed, some evidence in healthy subjects suggests that striatal DAT binding might be higher in the right compared to left hemisphere in healthy subjects (Laakso et al., 2000).  Conversely, if fewer copies of the 10-repeat DAT1 allele are associated with relatively higher available dopamine in the right hemisphere, then this would promote a leftward perceptual bias.
Although we confirm here an interaction between DAT1 genotype and a spatial bias to lateralised stimuli (see DAT1 by stimulus laterality interaction in the  Omnibus Task-component Analyses  section), the results of the current study however go beyond any simple perceptual bias account.  Instead we find that allelic variation in the DAT1 gene is linked to a specific lateralized attentional mechanism.  Those individuals not in possession of the 10-repeat DAT1 allele displayed an enhanced ability to suppress distracting information in the left-hemi-field compared to those with either one or two copies of this allele.  We propose that individuals without the 10-repeat DAT1 allele have higher levels of synaptic dopamine occasioned by lower DAT reuptake.  We further suggest that the DAT1 gene may influence attentional selection in part because of its varying effects on the development of fronto-parietal attention networks that are dominant in the right hemisphere.  This suggestion is supported both by the existence of DA projections to the frontal and parietal cortices in addition to the well documented projections to striatum, and by high densities of DAT-immunoreactive axons in the parietal lobe (Lewis et al., 2001).  Thus we argue that although perceptual biases linked to DAT1 genotype are consistent with asymmetric modulation of striatal DA, the specific enhancement of attentional selection seen here may be due to an effect of DAT1 genotype on DA modulation of fronto-parietal attention networks (Petersen and Posner, 2012). This suggestion should now be confirmed using DAT1 genotype-controlled studies and either fMRI or PET, in combination with behavioural measures such as those employed here. 
Although participants were instructed to maintain fixation across all tasks it is possible that random fixation breaks occurred in the current study, and it would be desirable to use eye-tracking in the future. However, since target display times for the spatial competition and spatial cueing tasks were brief (150ms), it is unlikely that sufficient time was available for systematic eye movements to be made to the lateralised targets.  Thus it is highly unlikely that eye movements could account for the relationship between DAT1 genotytpe and lateralised attentional selection. 
In summary, compared to individuals carrying one or two copies of the 10-repeat DAT1 allele, individuals without this allele demonstrated an immunity to increased distracters presented in the left hemi-field, suggesting they possess an enhanced attentional ability to suppress task-irrelevant stimuli within the left hemi-field.


FUNDING
MAB was supported by a NARSAD Young Investigator Grant, a Project Grant (569533) from the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) of Australia, and an NHMRC Career Development Award (569631). MAB is currently supported by a Future Fellowship from the Australian Research Council of Australia (FT130101488).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Natalia Lukito and Lynn Tan for data collection. 
REFERENCES	
Bellgrove M a, Barry E, Johnson K a, Cox M, Daibhis A, Daly M, Hawi Z, Lambert D, Fitzgerald M, McNicholas F, Robertson IH, Gill M, Kirley A, D ibhis A (2008) Spatial attentional bias as a marker of genetic risk, symptom severity, and stimulant response in ADHD. Neuropsychopharmacology 33:2536 2545.
Bellgrove MA, Chambers CD, Johnson KA, Daibhis A, Daly M, Hawi Z, Lambert D, Gill M, Robertson IH (2007) Dopaminergic genotype biases spatial attention in healthy children. Mol Psychiatry 12:786 792.
Bellgrove MA, Hawi Z, Kirley A, Fitzgerald M, Gill M, Robertson IH (2005) Association between dopamine transporter (DAT1) genotype, left-sided inattention, and an enhanced response to methylphenidate in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 30:2290 2297.
Bellgrove MA, Johnson KA, Barry E, Mulligan A, Hawi Z, Gill M, Robertson I, Chambers CD (2009) Dopaminergic haplotype as a predictor of spatial inattention in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 66:1135 1142.
Brand A, Bradley MT (2012) Assessing the Effects of Technical Variance on the Statistical Outcomes of Web Experiments Measuring Response Times. Soc Sci Comput Rev 30:350 357.
Brookes KJ, Mill J, Guindalini C, Curran S, Xu X, Knight J, Chen CK, Huang YS, Sethna V, Taylor E, Chen W, Breen G, Asherson P (2006) A common haplotype of the dopamine transporter gene associated with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and interacting with maternal use of alcohol during pregnancy. Arch Gen Psychiatry 63:74 81.
Brookes KJ, Neale BM, Sugden K, Khan N, Asherson P, D Souza UM (2007) Relationship between VNTR polymorphisms of the human dopamine transporter gene and expression in post-mortem midbrain tissue. Am J Med Genet Part B Neuropsychiatr Genet 144:1070 1078.
Cheon KA, Ryu YH, Kim JW, Cho DY (2005) The homozygosity for 10-repeat allele at dopamine transporter gene and dopamine transporter density in Korean children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Relating to treatment response to methylphenidate. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 15:95 101.
Clark CR, Geffen GM, Geffen LB (1989) Catecholamines and the covert orientation of attention in humans. Neuropsychologia 27:131 139.
Cook Jr EH, Stein MA, Krasowski MD, Cox NJ, Olkon DM, Kieffer JE, Leventhal BL, Cook EH (1995) Association of attention-deficit disorder and the dopamine transporter gene. Am J Hum Genet 56:993 998.
Cornish KM, Manly T, Savage R, Swanson J, Morisano D, Butler N, Grant C, Cross G, Bentley L, Hollis CP (2005) Association of the dopamine transporter (DAT1) 10/10-repeat genotype with ADHD symptoms and response inhibition in a general population sample. Mol Psychiatry 10:686 698.
Coull JT, Nobre AC, Frith CD (2001) The noradrenergic  2 agonist clonidine modulates behavioural and neuroanatomical correlates of human attentional orienting and alerting. Cereb Cortex 11:73 84.
Damian MF (2010) Does variability in human performance outweigh imprecision in response devices such as computer keyboards? Behav Res Methods 42:205 211.
Driver J, Mattingley JB (1998) Parietal neglect and visual awareness. Nat Neurosci 1:17 22.
Eriksen CW, St.James JD (1986) Visual attention within and around the field of focal attention: A zoom lens model. Percept Psychophys 40:225 240.
Eriksen CW, Yeh Y (1985) Allocation of attention in the visual field. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 11:583 597.
Fleet WS, Valenstein E, Watson RT, Heilman KM (1987) Dopamine agonist therapy for neglect in humans. Neurology 37:1765 1770.
Fuke S, Suo S, Takahashi N, Koike H, Sasagawa N, Ishiura S (2001) The VNTR polymorphism of the human dopamine transporter (DAT1) gene affects gene expression. Pharmacogenomics J 1:152 156.
Glick SD, Shapiro RM (1985) Functional and neurochemical mechanisms of cerebral lateralization in rats. Cereb Lateralization Nonhum Species:157 183.
Gordon I, Rehavi M, Mintz M (1994) Bilateral imbalance in striatal DA-uptake controls rotation behavior. Brain Res 646:207 210.
Gorgoraptis N, Mah YH, MacHner B, Singh-Curry V, Malhotra P, Hadji-Michael M, Cohen D, Simister R, Nair A, Kulinskaya E, Ward N, Greenwood R, Husain M (2012) The effects of the dopamine agonist rotigotine on hemispatial neglect following stroke. Brain 135:2478 2491.
Grujic Z, Mapstone M, Gitelman DR, Johnson N, Weintraub S, Hays A, Kwasnica C, Harvey R, Mesulam MM (1998) Dopamine agonists reorient visual exploration away from the neglected hemispace. Neurology 51:1395 1398.
Guindalini C, Howard M, Haddley K, Laranjeira R, Collier D, Ammar N, Craig I, O Gara C, Bubb VJ, Greenwood T, Kelsoe J, Asherson P, Murray RM, Castelo A, Quinn JP, Vallada H, Breen G (2006) A dopamine transporter gene functional variant associated with cocaine abuse in a Brazilian sample. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:4552 4557.
Heinz A, Goldman D, Jones DW, Palmour R, Hommer D, Gorey JG, Lee KS, Linnoila M, Weinberger DR (2000) Genotype influences in vivo dopamine transporter availability in human striatum. Neuropsychopharmacology 22:133 139.
Iversen SD (1984) Behavioural effects of manipulation of basal ganglia neurotransmitters. Ciba Found Symp 107:183 200.
Laakso A, Vilkman H, Alakare B, Haaparanta M, Bergman J, Solin O, Peurasaari J, R kk l inen V, Syv lahti E, Hietala J, Rakkolainen V, Syvalahti E (2000) Striatal dopamine transporter binding in neuroleptic-naive patients with schizophrenia studied with positron emission tomography. Am J Psychiatry 157:269 271.
Lewis DA, Melchitzky DS, Sesack SR, Whitehead RE, Auh S, Sampson A (2001) Dopamine transporter immunoreactivity in monkey cerebral cortex: Regional, laminar, and ultrastructural localization. J Comp Neurol 432:119 136.
Maruff P, Hay D, Malone V, Currie J (1995) Asymmetries in the covert orienting of visual spatial attention in schizophrenia. Neuropsychologia 33:1205 1223.
Michelhaugh SK, Fiskerstrand C, Lovejoy E, Bannon MJ, Quinn JP (2001) The dopamine transporter gene (SLC6A3) variable number of tandem repeats domain enhances transcription in dopamine neurons. J Neurochem 79:1033 1038.
Mill J, Asherson P, Browes C, D Souza U, Craig I (2002) Expression of the dopamine transporter gene is regulated by the 3  UTR VNTR: Evidence from brain and lymphocytes using quantitative RT-PCR. Am J Med Genet - Neuropsychiatr Genet 114:975 979.
Miller GM, Madras BK (2002) Polymorphisms in the 3 -untranslated region of human and monkey dopamine transporter genes affect reporter gene expression. Mol Psychiatry 7:44 55.
Newman DP, O Connell RG, Nathan PJ, Bellgrove MA (2012) Dopamine transporter genotype predicts attentional asymmetry in healthy adults. Neuropsychologia 50:2823 2829.
Petersen SE, Posner MI (2012) The attention system of the human brain: 20 years after. Annu Rev Neurosci 35:73 89.
Posner MI, Walker JA, Friedrich FJ, Rafal RD (1984) Effects of parietal injury on covert orienting of attention. J Neurosci 4:1863 1874.
Sheppard DM, Bradshaw JL, Mattingley JB, Lee P (1999) Effects of stimulant medication on the lateralisation of line bisection judgements of children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 66:57 63.
Silk TJ, Newman DP, Eramudugolla R, Vance A, Bellgrove MA (2014) Influence of methylphenidate on spatial attention asymmetry in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Preliminary findings. Neuropsychologia 56:178 183.
Simmons JP, Nelson LD, Simonsohn U (2011) False-positive psychology: undisclosed flexibility in data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant. Psychol Sci 22:1359 1366.
Stephens M, Donnelly P (2003) A Comparison of Bayesian Methods for Haplotype Reconstruction from Population Genotype Data. Am J Hum Genet 73:1162 1169.
Stephens M, Smith NJ, Donnelly P (2001) A new statistical method for haplotype reconstruction from population data. Am J Hum Genet 68:978 989.
Tomer R, Slagter HA, Christian BT, Fox AS, King CR, Murali D, Davidson RJ (2012) Dopamine Asymmetries Predict Orienting Bias in Healthy Individuals. Cereb Cortex Epub ahead.
VanNess SH, Owens MJ, Kilts CD (2005) The variable number of tandem repeats element in DAT1 regulates in vitro dopamine transporter density. BMC Genet 6.
Voytko ML, Olton DS, Richardson RT, Gorman LK, Tobin JR, Price DL (1994) Basal forebrain lesions in monkeys disrupt attention but not learning and memory. J Neurosci 14:167 186.
Ward NM, Brown VJ (1996) Covert orienting of attention in the rat and the role of striatal dopamine. J Neurosci 16:3082 3088.
Witte EA, Davidson MC, Marrocco RT (1997) Effects of altering brain cholinergic activity on covert orienting of attention: Comparison of monkey and human performance. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 132:324 334.
Zozulinsky P, Greenbaum L, Brande-Eilat N, Braun Y, Shalev I, Tomer R (2014) Dopamine system genes are associated with orienting bias among healthy individuals. Neuropsychologia 62:48 54.

Figure and Table Captions
Figure 1.  Task schematics of the Spatial Competition, Spatial Cuing and Flanker Tasks used to probe attentional and response selection mechanisms.

Figure 2. Interactions of DAT1 3 UTR VNTR genotype as a function of task-irrelevant stimulus laterality (left, right) for each task component in each of the spatial competition [A], spatial cuing [B] and flanker tasks [C].  [A] Set-size effect (RT, ms) during the spatial competition task was significantly reduced in the zero 10-repeat DAT1 group for left hemi-field distractors; [B] The reorienting cost (RT, ms) engendered by left cues was reduced in the zero 10-repeat repeat DAT1 group; [C] There was no effect of DAT1 genotype on response selection as measured by flanker task incongruence cost (RT, ms).  Error bars are  1 SE.

Table 1. Genotype specific demographics and associated significance tests.


Follow-up: Testing for an effect of time-on-task on the relationship between dopamine transporter genotype and distractor hemifield
The follow-up analysis at the end of Chapter 2 tested the interaction between time-on-task and DAT1 genotype and found no clear evidence for a differential direction of the time-on-task related shift in RT asymmetry or  -asymmetry depending on DAT1 genotype. A similar follow-up test can be done on the set-size data of the current chapter. The key effect of the current chapter is shown in Figure 2A of the manuscript above, where those participants without a copy of the 10/10 DAT1 genotype show an asymmetric set-size effect - they are less influenced by distractors in the left-hemifield. To test whether time-on-task modulates this DAT1 genotype   Distractor Hemifield interaction, the 320 competition task trials were split into 3 equal time-on-task bins, and subjected to a DAT1 genotype   Distractor Hemifield   Time-on-task analysis. As expected, this analysis revealed the significant DAT1 genotype   Distractor Hemifield interaction [ 2(2) = 6.65, p= 0.036] reported in the manuscript above (Figure 2A). A significant main effect of time-on-task showed that the set-size effect tended to be smaller during the Final Block than during the First and Second Blocks [ 2(2) = 7.10, p= 0.029]. There was, however, no significant DAT1 genotype   Distractor Hemifield   Time-on-task interaction, [ 2(10) = 7.53, p= 0.675]. Therefore, there is no evidence for an interaction effect between DAT1 genotype and time-on-task on visuospatial attention asymmetry in the data of Chapter 5.  
 
Figure 3. Set-size effect as a function of DAT1 genotype, Distractor Hemifield, Time-on-task (First vs. Second vs. Final Block)  










CHAPTER 6: GENERAL DISCUSSION
 
Summary and implications of findings
The overarching aim of this thesis was to investigate potential biological drivers of visuospatial attention asymmetry in neurologically healthy subjects. More specifically, this thesis examined the impact of the state factors of alertness and non-spatial attention load, and the trait factors of dopamine transporter genotype and initial or baseline bias on visuospatial asymmetry. The experimental chapters found evidence for an effect of both alertness and dopamine transporter genotype on visuospatial attention asymmetries in healthy participants, and no evidence for an effect of non-spatial attention load. Broadly, we can conclude that both state and trait factors explain variation in visuospatial attention asymmetry. In the cases of alertness (a state factor) and dopamine transporter genotype (a trait factor), the evidence suggests that these factors are independently related to visuospatial attention asymmetry, since follow-up analyses for Chapters 2 and Chapter 5 found no clear evidence for an interaction between these factors. Further, Chapter 3 tested for observer subtypes in the direction of attention asymmetry shift over time, dependent on initial/baseline spatial attention bias. This revealed no evidence for a differential time-on-task related shift in spatial asymmetry (i.e. the majority of healthy participants have a rightward shift in visuospatial attention asymmetry with decreasing alertness over time). 
That the direction of the effect of alertness on visuospatial attention asymmetry was not related to trait factors is important. It means we can have more confidence that direct manipulations of alertness, such as blue enriched light exposure, should influence visuospatial asymmetry in the same direction (i.e. higher alertness leads to less leftward inattention/more rightward bias) regardless of dopamine transporter genotype or baseline attention bias. The demonstration in Chapter 4 that blue enriched light can improve left hemifield response times via an effect on right hemisphere alpha activity is an exciting catalyst for future research. Considering that light therapy is a non-invasive manipulation of alertness which lasts post exposure, the results highlight the potential for future research into high intensity light as a tool to increase alertness and promote attention to left space in disorders involving right-hemisphere dysfunction. Since each of the experimental chapters above include their own discussion section, this chapter will focus its attention on future research ideas arising from the experimental chapters. First however, a brief discussion of some limitations that have not yet been mentioned above is warranted.
Limitations
First, since only right handed participants were included in this thesis, the results can only be generalised to the right-handed population (the 90% majority (Sun & Walsh, 2006)). This was however a deliberate experimental control. Studies of lateralization of function have shown greater variability among left-handed subjects than right-handers in both language lateralisation and visuospatial information processing (Badzakova-Trajkov, H berling, Roberts, & Corballis, 2010; Sommer, Ramsey, Mandl, & Kahn, 2002; Steinmetz, Volkmann, J ncke, & Freund, 1991; Szaflarski et al., 2002). Further, although handedness varies naturally in the population, left-handedness can sometimes be determined by early developmental deficits (Gutwinski et al., 2011; Willems, Van der Haegen, Fisher, & Francks, 2014). Consequently including a left-handed cohort in the current thesis would necessitate substantial increases in the sample size of each study and a need to ensure that left-handedness was not related to developmental deficits. Although this would have been possible, it was not deemed practical given both the scope of this thesis and the consideration that the majority of the general population is right handed. Therefore this thesis was limited to right-handed participants, in line with most other studies of spatial attention and cognitive neuroscience studies more generally (Willems et al., 2014). Nevertheless, an interesting avenue for future research will be to ensure that the effect of blue enriched light on visuospatial attention asymmetry is not influenced by handedness. 
Second, all the measures of interest throughout this thesis were recorded as reaction time (RT). Experimental Chapters 2, 3 and 4 all used mouse button clicks to record responses while Chapter 5 used computer keyboard responses, which have a relatively longer polling delay than a mouse. Nevertheless the keyboards used for response acquisition in Chapter 5 are very unlikely to have had an effect on statistical outcomes. Typical keyboard lag is not of great concern in designs like that of Chapter 5, where RTs are averaged across many trials to arrive at a valid estimate of conditional means, because the same keyboard is used across experimental conditions and thus does not affect relative RT differences between conditions. Of greater concern is the effect that error variability due to infrequent keyboard polling may have on the statistical outcomes. Damian (2010) investigated this issue using both empirical data and modelling and found that given the inherent variability observed in human performance on cognitive tasks recording RT, the degree of imprecision introduced by the use of a keyboard for RT acquisition is vanishingly small and extremely unlikely to make a difference to statistical outcomes concerning mean RT differences. For example, using typical RT paradigms including a Flanker task, Damian (2010) showed that additional trial-to-trial response uncertainty of 18ms due to error variability in keyboard polling will only lead to an average absolute deviation from the  true  conditional mean of 1ms, even if only 13 observations are obtained per condition (Damian, 2010; Figure 2). More recently, Brand and Bradley (2012) ran a simulation study to gauge the loss of statistical power and effect size estimate accuracy in an RT study with technical timing error of 10-100ms, versus a study without any timing error.  Again, their results showed that in the case of between subject designs with small effect sizes such as those in Chapter 5, the additional error variance reduced the statistical power and the accuracy of the effect size estimate by a negligible magnitude. Therefore this is not a serious limitation.
Third, the genetic aspect of this thesis focused on a single  candidate  gene (DAT1). This gene was selected on the basis of an a priori hypothesis regarding the role of dopamine in regulating spatial attention (see Chapter 1), and the fact that DAT is the main molecular target for methylphenidate which has been shown to  normalise  visuospatial attention asymmetry in ADHD (e.g. Silk, Newman et al. (2016); attached as Appendix 5). It is likely however that there are multiple genes which account for variation in visuospatial attention asymmetry between participants. Data collection for the study presented in Chapter 5 is ongoing, and in the future we will acquire the sample size needed (N=2000) to conduct a well powered hypothesis free genome-wide association (GWA) study of visuospatial attention.
Finally, the electrophysiology in this thesis has focused solely on asymmetries in pre-target preparatory signals ( -band; 8-14 Hz), and their relationship to alertness and visuospatial attention asymmetry (see Chapters 2 and 4). This thesis has not explored asymmetries in post-onset, target processing signals and their relationship to visuospatial attention asymmetry. There may be important insights to be gained by exploring potential asymmetries in post-onset target processing signals in future. This point is discussed in detail in the section directly below under the sub-heading  Development of event-related markers of visuospatial attention asymmetry . 
 
Ideas for future research
Blue enriched light exposure at daytime
The observations herein that manipulation of alertness influences both right-hemisphere  -power and visuospatial attention asymmetry are consistent with the idea that right-hemisphere lateralised networks for regulating alertness interact with the symmetric dorsal networks for directing spatial attention. The data in this thesis therefore support Corbetta and Shulman s (2011) model of spatial attention networks, but do not fully accord with Mesulam s (1981) model which does not account for the effect of alertness on spatial attention asymmetries. The data in this thesis also accord with recent evidence from simultaneous EEG and TMS work (Capotosto et al., 2012) suggesting that although both hemispheres contribute to the typical change in  -asymmetry when shifting spatial attention, a hemispheric specialisation exists such that the right IPS plays a specialised role in controlling (non-spatial) activation of the occipital cortex. 
Even so, the findings in Chapter 4 show that the roles that  -activity plays in mediating the relationship between alertness and spatial attention are not as simple as previously thought. Previous studies of spatial attention have reported decreased  -power in the hemisphere contralateral to an attended target location (note that this relationship is dependent on a paradigm where visual targets can appear in either the left or right hemifield, see Slagter et al. (2015)). In Chapter 4 we might have expected that the light-induced enhancement of left-hemifield target detection would have been coupled with a corresponding decrease in right-hemisphere  -power. Instead, however, we observed a light-induced increase in right-hemisphere  -power. Further analysis of this seemingly counterintuitive finding showed that higher light intensities increased right-hemisphere  -power at the same time as weakening  -power s slowing influence on forthcoming response times. Two important points of difference between Chapter 4 and previous studies of spatial attention asymmetry and  -power may be driving this effect: (1) all previous studies were conducted at daytime and (2) previous studies did not involve blue enriched light manipulation. In the discussion section of Chapter 4, we outline a hypothesis that night-time exposure to blue-enriched light disrupts the slowing influence of  -power on forthcoming response times by introducing a new source of  -modulation, related to inhibition of the circadian drive for sleep. As night-time exposure to blue enriched light increases alertness and improves left hemifield response times, it simultaneously induces increased  -modulation related to inhibition of the circadian drive for sleep. These signals likely merge on the scalp with the signal produced by  -generators for spatial attention. The two separate sources of  -band signal merging on the scalp would disrupt the usual relationship between  -power and behavioural performance seen during experiments run at daytime when there is no circadian drive for sleep. Evidence suggests that blue enriched light should still activate right-hemisphere networks (Sinclair, Ponsford, Taffe, Lockley, & Rajaratnam, 2014; Vandewalle et al., 2006) and improve left-hemifield target detection when administered during the daytime, provided participants are not already at ceiling levels of alertness. This evidence is discussed below under  The potential for light therapy in disorders of spatial attention . Still, in order to specifically test whether light s inhibition of the circadian drive for sleep explains the increase in right hemisphere  -power observed in Chapter 4, future research must expose participants to blue-enriched light at daytime when there is no circadian drive for sleep.

The potential for light therapy in disorders of spatial attention
Unilateral spatial neglect, or  neglect , is a disorder of attention involving the inability to detect, respond to, or orient toward stimuli on the side contralateral to cerebral damage (Robertson & Marshall, 1993).  Neglect is more severe and enduring following lesions of the right hemisphere (resulting in neglect of the left side of space), than after damage to the left hemisphere (Ringman, Saver, Woolson, Clarke, & Adams, 2004). Neglect can arise from lesions to a variety of cortical and subcortical areas, or to the white matter connections between them (Bartolomeo, Thiebaut de Schotten, & Chica, 2012; Verdon, Schwartz, Lovblad, Hauert, & Vuilleumier, 2010; Vuilleumier, 2013). 
  In addition to spatial attention deficits, neglect is associated with impairments of non-spatial attention (Bellgrove et al., 2013; Robertson et al., 1997; Van Vleet & DeGutis, 2013). It has been proposed that the relationship between non-spatial processes and spatial attention asymmetry result from connections between the right hemisphere s lateralised ventral attention network which influence inter-hemispheric rivalry in a bilateral dorsal orienting network (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011). The bilateral dorsal orienting network is activated by selectively attending to stimuli across space and linking them to appropriate responses, whilst the right lateralised ventral attention network has been linked to non-spatial processes such as sustained attention and alertness. Acquired damage within the right lateralised ventral network may cause a more global decrease in right hemisphere activation, giving the left dorsal orienting network a competitive activation advantage over the right dorsal network, driving attention rightwards (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011).
Interactions between the dorsal and ventral attention networks are mediated by the locus-coeruleus/noradrenergic (LC-NA) arousal system (Coull, Nobre, & Frith, 2001; Posner & Petersen, 1990). Diminished alertness levels result in decreased activation within the right lateralised ventral network, giving left hemisphere regions a competitive advantage and driving attention rightwards. Multiple lines of evidence support this account. For example, alerting tones to phasically increase arousal can temporarily remediate the extent of left neglect in those with right hemisphere damage (Robertson et al., 1998).  In healthy participants, Newman et al. (2013) showed that changes in spatial asymmetry with reduced alertness over time are accompanied by changes in the hemispheric lateralisation of EEG   power (see Chapter 2). Sleep deprivation in healthy participants causes relative left hemi-field inattention in the visual domain (Manly et al., 2005), while a pronounced auditory inattention to left space occurs during drowsy periods prior to sleep onset (Bareham et al., 2014). In addition, Dodds and colleagues demonstrated that enhancement of alertness using the psychostimulant modafinil could offset the rightward shift in spatial bias that occurs with time-on-task (Dodds et al., 2009).  
Considering that light therapy is a non-invasive, non-pharmacological manipulation of alertness which lasts post light exposure, the results of Chapter 4 of this thesis suggest that future research should test the possibility that light might be harnessed as a tool to increase alertness and promote attention to left space in disorders involving right-hemisphere dysfunction and leftward inattention such as unilateral spatial neglect (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011; Robertson et al., 1998) and ADHD (Bellgrove et al., 2013; Chan et al., 2009).  We have previously shown evidence that the common stimulant treatment for ADHD, methylphenidate, may normalize target detection between the hemi-fields in ADHD via enhancement of the right-lateralised ventral attention networks that support non-spatial attention (Silk, Newman, Eramudugolla, Vance, & Bellgrove, 2014); this work is attached herein as Appendix 5. Likewise the leftward inattention seen in neglect, can be reduced by treatment with stimulants that target the dopamine and noradrenaline systems (Fleet et al., 1987; Gorgoraptis et al., 2012; Malhotra, Parton, Greenwood, & Husain, 2006).
Research on rodents suggests that the alerting effects of light on the brain are mediated in part via connections from the suprachiasmatic nucleus to the LC-NA arousal system (Aston-Jones et al., 2001; Gonz lez & Aston-Jones, 2006). Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs) which are maximally sensitive to short wavelength (blue) light (~480nm) mediate a light induced alerting signal to a number of sub-cortical (non-visual) brain regions involved in the regulation of circadian and sleep-wake cycles, including the suprachiasmatic nucleus and thalamus (Berson et al., 2002; Gooley et al., 2012; Perrin et al., 2004; Vandewalle et al., 2006; Vandewalle, Gais, et al., 2007; Vandewalle, Schmidt, et al., 2007; Zaidi et al., 2007). From here, ipRGCs project multi-synaptically to the pineal gland, lateral geniculate nucleus, superior colliculus, and the LC-NA system which projects broadly throughout the cortex, particularly to prefrontal and parietal cortices (Cajochen, 2007; Vandewalle et al., 2013; Vandewalle, Gais, et al., 2007). Recent neuroimaging studies using PET (Perrin et al., 2004) and fMRI (Vandewalle et al., 2006) have found that light exposure modulates activity in regions of the right hemisphere known to be disrupted in spatial neglect, such as the right prefrontal cortex, intraparietal sulcus and superior parietal lobule (Perrin et al., 2004; Vandewalle et al., 2006).  The alerting properties of blue-enriched light have already been harnessed to improve sustained attention and reduce fatigue in patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI) (Sinclair et al., 2014), however the potential benefits of light therapy for remediating the pathological inattention to left space after right-hemisphere damage has not been tested. 
It remains to be tested whether high intensities of short wavelength light still improve left-hemifield target detection during the daytime (the experiment in Chapter 4 was carried in the evening/night after ~14 hours wakefulness). If healthy participants have alertness levels close to ceiling during daytime then light exposure may not improve alertness or spatial attention. Nonetheless, there are two reasons to expect that high-intensity daytime light exposure may still improve left-hemifield attention in those who suffer daytime fatigue or sleepiness. First,  Sinclair et al. (2014) found 45 minutes of high intensity blue light exposure each morning reduced fatigue and daytime sleepiness in TBI patients, and second, Vandewalle et al. (2006) found that daytime light exposure asymmetrically increased BOLD activity in a number of key right hemisphere cortical nodes of the networks underpinning spatial attention (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011).  These observations, when combined with the effect of light on left-hemifield target detection discovered in Chapter 4, suggest an important focus for future research into light-based interventions for right hemisphere disorders of spatial attention such as unilateral spatial neglect. 

Direct manipulation of the noradrenergic (NA) system and spatial attention asymmetry
This thesis established that blue enriched light has an asymmetric influence on brain activity and improves left-hemifield target detection speed however the underlying neurochemistry is not fully understood. The discussion above outlines evidence that the LC-NA arousal system may be involved in this relationship but our knowledge here remains incomplete. The seminal work of Smith and Nutt (1996) showed that a low dose of the drug clonidine reduced noradrenergic (NA) cell firing to induce attentional lapses in healthy volunteers, and that this deficit could be (a) temporarily reversed by loud noises and (b) more permanently reversed by the alpha-2a antagonist, idazoxan. Clonidine is an  -2-adrenoreceptor agonist which at low doses acts presynaptically to decrease noradrenergic cell firing and noradrenaline release. Clonidine at these low doses also improves response speed and asymmetrically modulates brain activity in right superior parietal cortex during spatial reorienting in healthy participants (Clifford, Day, & Orwin, 1982; Coull et al., 2001; Smith & Nutt, 1996). 
One possible avenue for future research into the relationship between blue light exposure, the LC-NA arousal system, and spatial attention would be a pharmacological challenge using clonidine to specifically reduce NA firing and decrease alertness. Along with causing a general slowing of response times and decreased accuracy, clonidine should cause relatively greater left-hemifield inattention. The dose of clonidine could then be followed by administration of high intensity blue light in an attempt to reverse the effect of drug and improve alertness and left hemifield attention. This would have to occur in a randomised, placebo-controlled, cross-over design to test whether the alerting influence of high intensity blue enriched light could reverse the spatial attention decrements caused by reduced NA cell firing. Pharmacologically taxing healthy participants  alertness using clonidine may provide a way of lowering healthy participant s daytime alertness from ceiling, to enable an effect of blue enriched light on left hemifield attention during daytime. 

Development of event-related markers of visuospatial attention asymmetry
The EEG work in this thesis has focused on asymmetries in pre-target preparatory signals ( -band; 8-14 Hz) and their relationship to alertness and visuospatial attention asymmetry (see Chapters 2 and 4). This thesis has not however explored the potential insights to be gained by measuring asymmetries in post-onset, target processing signals and their relationship to visuospatial attention asymmetry.  Aside from early sensory-evoked signals (e.g. SSVEPs and the N1 and P1 components), the most commonly studied post-onset target processing signal for spatial attention orienting and selection is the  N2pc  component, which has been extensively investigated using visual search paradigms (Eimer & Grubert, 2014; Woodman & Luck, 1999). However despite decades of research, the N2pc component has never been shown to correlate with behavioural performance (e.g. detection accuracy or response time). Another limitation of using the N2pc for studying visuospatial attention asymmetry is that it cannot be measured on a hemisphere-specific and single-trial level, because the N2pc is measured by calculating cross-condition and cross hemisphere subtractions. There has also been a long-standing debate regarding whether the N2pc primarily reflects the facilitation of target processing (e.g. Eimer & Grubert, 2014) or the inhibition of distractor stimuli (e.g. Luck, 2012). Furthermore, due to overlaying sensory evoked components in the ERP trace, the N2pc does not easily lend itself to being studied with respect to its role in the perceptual evidence accumulation and decision making process.
	During the course of this thesis the candidate has been involved in another (separate) line of research aiming to improve measurement of post-target-onset attentional selection signals from EEG (Loughnane, Newman, et al., (2016); attached as Appendix 6). Although not yet applied to the study of visuospatial attention asymmetry (and therefore not suitable for inclusion as an experimental chapter in this thesis), this work has identified and characterised EEG signals which improve on the limitations of the N2pc component discussed above. In this research, variations of the fixation controlled dot motion paradigm were used in which lateralised continuous random motion stimuli were monitored for seamless changes in a single feature (motion coherence). The absence of sudden stimulus intensity changes served to eliminate visual-evoked transients from the event-related EEG trace, providing a clearer view of the higher order neural dynamics involved in target selection and perceptual evidence accumulation. This allowed us to identify and characterise two early contralateral (N2c) and ipsilateral (N2i) deflections over lateral visual areas that can be measured without the need for cross-condition or cross hemisphere subtractions (Loughnane et al., 2016).  The N2c selection signal has the following advantages over previous work: (a) it is directly related to behavioural performance (response time and accuracy), (b) it can be robustly and independently measured in a hemisphere-specific (separate left and right hemisphere measurements) fashion on the single-trial level, (c) it is unambiguously related to target processing as opposed to inhibition of distractor stimuli, and (d) it has a clear relationship to a following neural signal reflecting perceptual evidence accumulation (the centro-parietal positivity, or  CPP ; (Kelly & O Connell, 2013; O Connell, Dockree, & Kelly, 2012)). These characteristics will make the N2c, in combination with the CPP, well suited to the study of post-target neural dynamics related to visuospatial attention asymmetries in future. For example, although we know that the dopamine transporter genotype (DAT1) is related to visuospatial attention asymmetry, we lack knowledge regarding the neural dynamics underpinning this relationship and lack objective evidence for inter-hemispheric activation differences as a function of DAT1 genotype. The follow-up analysis in Chapter 2 found no relationship between dopamine transporter genotype and pre-target preparatory  -activity, so it may be the case that DAT1 is related to post-onset target processing which may be reflected as asymmetries in target selection (N2c) or perceptual evidence accumulation (CPP) signals. The candidate will pursue this line of enquiry directly after this thesis. 
The role of white matter asymmetries in visuospatial attention
As discussed in Chapter 1, hemispheric asymmetry in the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF; a white matter bundle connecting frontal and parietal cortical regions) is another trait factor related to visuospatial attention asymmetry (Chechlacz et al., 2015; Thiebaut De Schotten et al., 2005; Thiebaut de Schotten et al., 2011).  Marshal and colleagues found that participants with greater SLF1 volume in the right hemisphere compared to the left hemisphere tended to have better ability to modulate right compared to left hemisphere pre-target alpha and gamma band de/synchronization in response to spatial cues (Marshall et al., 2015).  The candidate has recently begun a new line of research to follow on from this thesis which will investigate whether the influence of hemispheric asymmetries in SLF volume on visuospatial attention asymmetries is independent from the influence of dopamine transporter genotype. This research will also extend that of Marshall et al. (2015) by exploring post-target signals of target selection (N2c) and perceptual evidence accumulation (CPP) and their relationship to SLF volume and spatial attention asymmetries. Consistent with the hypothesis that the SLF mediates communication within frontoparietal attention networks, it is expected that those with greater SLF volume in the right hemisphere compared to the left hemisphere will exhibit greater right hemisphere N2c amplitudes, along with an earlier CPP onset and a steeper CPP slope for visual targets presented in the left hemifield compared to right hemifield targets.  

Visuospatial attention asymmetries and ADHD
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) involves developmentally inappropriate levels of inattention, hyperactivity or impulsivity (Graetz, Sawyer, Hazell, Arney, & Baghurst, 2001).  Accumulating evidence suggests lateralised impairments of visuospatial attention may be a reliable attentional phenotype  (Bellgrove et al., 2013; Chan et al., 2009; Geeraerts et al., 2007; Ter Huurne et al., 2013).  Children with ADHD are slower and less accurate at detecting targets presented in the left, as compared to right, hemi-field and are slower and less accurate in responding to invalidly cued left, compared to right, targets (Bellgrove et al., 2009; Bellgrove, Eramudugolla, Newman, Vance, & Mattingley, 2013; Silk, Newman, Eramudugolla, Vance, & Bellgrove, 2014; Ter Huurne et al., 2013). This profile is consistent with the predominantly right hemisphere focus of abnormalities in structural and functional brain imaging studies of ADHD (Silk et al., 2005; Vance et al., 2007).  Evidence suggests that the indirect dopamine agonist and stimulant methylphenidate (MPH) asymmetrically modulates spatial attention in ADHD, improving attention to left space (Bellgrove et al., 2008; Nigg, Swanson, & Hinshaw, 1997; Sheppard et al., 1999; Silk et al., 2014). Given the known alerting effects of blue-enriched light and the demonstration herein that high light intensities improve left hemifield attention, future research could explore the use of blue-enriched light exposure as a non-pharmacological stimulant to improve attention deficits in ADHD. Furthermore, although we know that those with ADHD tend to show a subtle inattention of the left hemifield, we lack objective electrophysiological evidence for right hemisphere dysfunction in ADHD.  The electrophysiological paradigm of Loughnane et al. (2016; attached as Appendix 6) will allow an unprecedented clear view of differences in target selection (N2c) and evidence accumulation (CPP) for stimuli in the left versus right hemifield in participants with ADHD. 

Conclusion
This thesis has investigated biological drivers of visuospatial attentional asymmetry in neurologically healthy subjects. The findings provide new insights into the relationship between alertness and spatial attention asymmetry and show that this relationship is independent of dopamine transporter genotype and baseline visuospatial bias. The work conducted herein paves the way for a future series of studies to shed further light on the neurobiology of spatial attention. Furthermore this thesis discovered a novel method of manipulating visuospatial attention asymmetry via blue enriched light exposure and its influence on alertness. In the medium term, the results from this thesis will lead to exciting new research into the potential of light therapy for right hemisphere disorders of spatial attention such as unilateral spatial neglect. Such research is much needed as there remains a lack of validated rehabilitative techniques for spatial neglect. 
 
REFERENCES
Adler, C. M., Sax, K. W., Holland, S. K., Schmithorst, V., Rosenberg, L., & Strakowski, S. M. (2001). Changes in neuronal activation with increasing attention demand in healthy volunteers: An fMRI study. Synapse, 42(4), 266 272.
An, L., Cao, X. H., Cao, Q. J., Sun, L., Yang, L., Zou, Q. H.,   Wang, Y. F. (2013). Methylphenidate normalizes resting-state brain dysfunction in boys with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 38(7), 1287 1295.
Aston-Jones, G., Chen, S., Zhu, Y., & Oshinsky, M. L. (2001). A Neural Circuit for Circadian Regulation of Arousal. Nature Neuroscience, 4(7), 732 738.
Badzakova-Trajkov, G., H berling, I. S., Roberts, R. P., & Corballis, M. C. (2010). Cerebral asymmetries: complementary and independent processes. PLoS ONE, 5(3), e9682. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009682
Banerjee, S., Snyder, A. C., Molholm, S., & Foxe, J. J. (2011). Oscillatory alpha-band mechanisms and the deployment of spatial attention to anticipated auditory and visual target locations: supramodal or sensory-specific control mechanisms? The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 31(27), 9923 32. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4660-10.2011
Bareham, C. A., Manly, T., Pustovaya, O. V, Scott, S. K., & Bekinschtein, T. A. (2014). Losing the left side of the world: rightward shift in human spatial attention with sleep onset. Scientific Reports, 4, 5092.
Barnett, A. G., van der Pols, J. C., & Dobson, A. J. (2005). Regression to the mean: What it is and how to deal with it. International Journal of Epidemiology, 34(1), 215 220.
Barrett, A. M., Crosson, J. B., Crucian, G. P., & Heilman, K. M. (2000). Horizontal line bisections in upper and lower body space. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS, 6(4), 455 9.
Bartolomeo, P., Thiebaut de Schotten, M., & Chica, A. B. (2012). Brain networks of visuospatial attention and their disruption in visual neglect. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 110. http://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00110
Bellgrove, M. A., Barry, E., Johnson, K. a, Cox, M., Daibhis, A., Daly, M.,   D ibhis, A. (2008). Spatial attentional bias as a marker of genetic risk, symptom severity, and stimulant response in ADHD. Neuropsychopharmacology, 33(10), 2536 2545. http://doi.org/1301637 [pii] 10.1038/sj.npp.1301637
Bellgrove, M. A., Chambers, C. D., Johnson, K. A., Daibhis, A., Daly, M., Hawi, Z.,   Robertson, I. H. (2007). Dopaminergic genotype biases spatial attention in healthy children. Mol Psychiatry, 12(8), 786 792.
Bellgrove, M. A., Dockree, P. M., Aimola, L., & Robertson, I. H. (2004). Attenuation of spatial attentional asymmetries with poor sustained attention. Neuroreport, 15(6), 1065 1069.
Bellgrove, M. A., Eramudugolla, R., Newman, D. P., Vance, A., & Mattingley, J. B. (2013). Influence of attentional load on spatial attention in acquired and developmental disorders of attention. Neuropsychologia, 51(6), 1085 1093. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.01.019
Bellgrove, M. A., Hawi, Z., Kirley, A., Fitzgerald, M., Gill, M., & Robertson, I. H. (2005). Association between dopamine transporter (DAT1) genotype, left-sided inattention, and an enhanced response to methylphenidate in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30(12), 2290 2297. http://doi.org/10.1038/sj.npp.1300839
Bellgrove, M. A., Johnson, K. A., Barry, E., Mulligan, A., Hawi, Z., Gill, M.,   Chambers, C. D. (2009). Dopaminergic haplotype as a predictor of spatial inattention in children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(10), 1135 1142. http://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.120
Benwell, C. S. Y., Harvey, M., Gardner, S., & Thut, G. (2012). Stimulus- and state-dependence of systematic bias in spatial attention: Additive effects of stimulus-size and time-on-task. Cortex, 49(0), 827 836. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.12.007
Benwell, C. S. Y., Thut, G., Grant, A., & Harvey, M. (2014). A rightward shift in the visuospatial attention vector with healthy aging. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 6, 113. http://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2014.00113
Benwell, C. S. Y., Thut, G., Learmonth, G., & Harvey, M. (2013). Spatial attention: Differential shifts in pseudoneglect direction with time-on-task and initial bias support the idea of observer subtypes. Neuropsychologia, 51(13), 2747 2756.
Berson, D. M., Dunn, F. A., & Takao, M. (2002). Phototransduction by retinal ganglion cells that set the circadian clock. Science (New York, N.Y.), 295(5557), 1070 3.
Bisley, J. W., & Goldberg, M. E. (2003). Neuronat activity in the lateral intraparietal area and spatial attention. Science, 299(5603), 81 86.
Bogen, J. E., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (1965). Cerebral commissurotomy in man: Minor hemisphere dominance for certain visuo-spatial functions. Journal of Neurosurgery, 23, 394 399.
Booth, J. R., Burman, D. D., Meyer, J. R., Lei, Z., Trommer, B. L., Davenport, N. D.,   Mesulam, M. M. (2005). Larger deficits in brain networks for response inhibition than for visual selective attention in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 46(1), 94 111.
Bourne, V. J. (2006). The divided visual field paradigm: Methodological considerations. Laterality, 11(4), 373 393.
Bowers, D., & Heilman, K. M. (1980). Pseudoneglect: Effects of hemispace on a tactile line bisection task. Neuropsychologia, 18(4-5), 491 498.
Bradshaw, J. L. (1989). Hemispheric Specialisation and Psychological Function. New York: Wiley.
Brainard, G. C., & Hanifin, J. P. (2005). Photons, clocks, and consciousness. Journal of Biological Rhythms, 20(4), 314 25. http://doi.org/10.1177/0748730405278951
Brand, A., & Bradley, M. T. (2012). Assessing the Effects of Technical Variance on the Statistical Outcomes of Web Experiments Measuring Response Times. Social Science Computer Review, 30(3), 350 357.
Bressler, S. L., Tang, W., Sylvester, C. M., Shulman, G. L., & Corbetta, M. (2008). Top-down control of human visual cortex by frontal and parietal cortex in anticipatory visual spatial attention. Journal of Neuroscience, 28(40), 10056 10061.
Broca, P. (1861). Remarques sur le si ge de la facult  du langage articul , suivies d une observation d'aph mie (perte de la parole). Bulletin de La Soci t  Anatomique de Paris , 2, 330 357.
Brookes, K. J., Mill, J., Guindalini, C., Curran, S., Xu, X., Knight, J.,   Asherson, P. (2006). A common haplotype of the dopamine transporter gene associated with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and interacting with maternal use of alcohol during pregnancy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(1), 74 81.
Brookes, K. J., Neale, B. M., Sugden, K., Khan, N., Asherson, P., & D Souza, U. M. (2007). Relationship between VNTR polymorphisms of the human dopamine transporter gene and expression in post-mortem midbrain tissue. American Journal of Medical Genetics, Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 144(8), 1070 1078.
Bryden, M. P. (1982). Laterality: Functional Asymmetry in the Intact Brain. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Bundesen, C. (1990). A theory of visual attention. Psychological Review, 97(4), 523 547.
Butter, C. M., & Kirsch, N. (1992). Combined and separate effects of eye patching and visual stimulation on unilateral neglect following stroke. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 73(12), 1133 1139.
Cai, Q., Van Der Haegen, L., & Brysbaert, M. (2013). Complementary hemispheric specialization for language production and visuospatial attention. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110(4), E322 E330. http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1212956110
Cajochen, C. (2007). Alerting effects of light. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 11(6), 453 64. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2007.07.009
Capilla, A., Schoffelen, J.-M., Paterson, G., Thut, G., & Gross, J. (2012). Dissociated  -Band Modulations in the Dorsal and Ventral Visual Pathways in Visuospatial Attention and Perception. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y. : 1991), 1 12. http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs343
Capotosto, P., Babiloni, C., Romani, G. L., & Corbetta, M. (2012). Differential contribution of right and left parietal cortex to the control of spatial attention: A simultaneous EEG-rTMS study. Cerebral Cortex, 22(2), 446 454. http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr127
Chan, E., Mattingley, J. B., Huang-Pollock, C., English, T., Hester, R., Vance, A., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2009). Abnormal spatial asymmetry of selective attention in ADHD. J Child Psychol Psychiatry, 50(9), 1064 1072. http://doi.org/JCPP2096 [pii]10.1111/j.1469-7610.2009.02096.x
Chechlacz, M., Gillebert, C. R., Vangkilde, S. A., Petersen, A., & Humphreys, G. W. (2015). Structural Variability within Frontoparietal Networks and Individual Differences in Attentional Functions: An Approach Using the Theory of Visual Attention. Journal of Neuroscience, 35(30), 10647 10658. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0210-15.2015
Chen, P., Goedert, K. M., Murray, E., Kelly, K., Ahmeti, S., & Barrett, A. M. (2011). Spatial bias and right hemisphere function: sex-specific changes with aging. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS, 17(3), 455 62. http://doi.org/10.1017/S135561771100004X
Cheon, K. A., Ryu, Y. H., Kim, J. W., & Cho, D. Y. (2005). The homozygosity for 10-repeat allele at dopamine transporter gene and dopamine transporter density in Korean children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Relating to treatment response to methylphenidate. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 15(1), 95 101. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroneuro.2004.06.004
Clifford, J. M., Day, M. D., & Orwin, J. M. (1982). Reversal of clonidine induced miosis by the alpha 2-adrenoreceptor antagonist RX 781094. British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 14(1), 99 101.
Corballis, M. C. (1991). The lopsided ape. New York, NY: Oxford University Press .
Corballis, M. C. (2009). The evolution and genetics of cerebral asymmetry. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1519), 867 879.
Corballis, P. M., Funnell, M. G., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (2002). Hemispheric asymmetries for simple visual judgments in the split brain. Neuropsychologia, 40(4), 401 10.
Corbetta, M., Kincade, J. M., Ollinger, J. M., McAvoy, M. P., & Shulman, G. L. (2000). Voluntary orienting is dissociated from target detection in human posterior parietal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 3(3), 292 297. http://doi.org/10.1038/73009
Corbetta, M., Kincade, M. J., Lewis, C., Snyder, A. Z., & Sapir, A. (2005). Neural basis and recovery of spatial attention deficits in spatial neglect. Nature Neuroscience, 8(11), 1603 1610.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2011). Spatial neglect and attention networks. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 34(24), 569 599.
Cortese, S., Imperati, D., Zhou, J., Proal, E., Klein, R. G., Mannuzza, S.,   Castellanos, F. X. (2013). White Matter Alterations at 33-Year Follow-Up in Adults with Childhood Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Biological Psychiatry.
Coull, J. T., & Frith, C. D. (1998). Differential activation of right superior parietal cortex and intraparietal sulcus by spatial and nonspatial attention. NeuroImage, 8(2), 176 187.
Coull, J. T., Nobre, A. C., & Frith, C. D. (2001). The noradrenergic  2 agonist clonidine modulates behavioural and neuroanatomical correlates of human attentional orienting and alerting. Cerebral Cortex, 11(1), 73 84.
Cowey, A., Small, M., & Ellis, S. (1994). Left visuo-spatial neglect can be worse in far than in near space. Neuropsychologia, 32(9), 1059 1066.
Cowie, R., & Hamill, G. (1997). Variation among Nonclinical subjects on a line-bisection task. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 86(3 PART 1), 834.
Damian, M. F. (2010). Does variability in human performance outweigh imprecision in response devices such as computer keyboards? Behavior Research Methods, 42(1), 205 211.
David, A. S. (1993). Spatial and Selective Attention in the Cerebral Hemispheres in Depression, Mania, and Schizophrenia. Brain and Cognition, 23(2), 166 180.
De Renzi, E. (1985). Disorders of space, exploration and cognition. New York: Wiley.
Dietz, M. J., Friston, K. J., Mattingley, J. B., Roepstorff,  a., & Garrido, M. I. (2014). Effective Connectivity Reveals Right-Hemisphere Dominance in Audiospatial Perception: Implications for Models of Spatial Neglect. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(14), 5003 5011. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3765-13.2014
Dobler, V. B., Anker, S., Gilmore, J., Robertson, I. H., Atkinson, J., & Manly, T. (2005). Asymmetric deterioration of spatial awareness with diminishing levels of alertness in normal children and children with ADHD. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 46(11), 1230 1248. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2005.00421.x
Dodds, C. M., M ller, U., & Manly, T. (2009). Effects of psychostimulants on alertness and spatial bias in healthy participants. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(3), 529 537.
Dodds, C. M., van Belle, J., Peers, P. V, Dove, A., Cusack, R., Duncan, J., & Manly, T. (2008). The Effects of Time-on-Task and Concurrent Cognitive Load on Normal Visuospatial Bias. Neuropsychology, 22(4), 545 552.
Drago, V., Crucian, G. P., Pisani, F., & Heilman, K. M. (2006). Distribution of attention in normal people as a function of spatial location: right-left, up-down. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society : JINS, 12(4), 532 7.
Dufour, A., Touzalin, P., & Candas, V. (2007). Time-on-task effect in pseudoneglect. Experimental Brain Research, 176(3), 532 7.
Dyrholm, M., Kyllingsb k, S., Espeseth, T., & Bundesen, C. (2011). Generalizing parametric models by introducing trial-by-trial parameter variability: The case of TVA. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 55(6), 416 429. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2011.08.005
Eimer, M., & Grubert, A. (2014). Spatial attention can be allocated rapidly and in parallel to new visual objects. Current Biology : CB, 24(2), 193 8. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.12.001
Engel, A. K., Fries, P., & Singer, W. (2001). Dynamic predictions: oscillations and synchrony in top-down processing. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 2(10), 704 16. http://doi.org/10.1038/35094565
Ergenoglu, T., Demiralp, T., Bayraktaroglu, Z., Ergen, M., Beydagi, H., & Uresin, Y. (2004). Alpha rhythm of the EEG modulates visual detection performance in humans. Brain Research. Cognitive Brain Research, 20(3), 376 83. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.03.009
Facoetti, A., Turatto, M., Lorusso, M. L., & Mascetti, G. G. (2001). Orienting of visual attention in dyslexia: Evidence for asymmetric hemispheric control of attention. Experimental Brain Research, 138(1), 46 53.
Failla, C. V, Sheppard, D. M., & Bradshaw, J. L. (2003). Age and responding-hand related changes in performance of neurologically normal subjects on the line-bisection and chimeric-faces tasks. Brain Cogn, 52(3), 353 363.
Finke, K., Bublack, P., Krummenacher, J., Kyllings k, S., M ller, H. J., & Schneider, W. X. (2005). Usability of a theory of visual attention (TVA) for parameter-based measurement of attention I: Evidence from normal subjects. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 11(7), 832 842.
Finke, K., Dodds, C. M., Bublak, P., Regenthal, R., Baumann, F., Manly, T., & M ller, U. (2010). Effects of modafinil and methylphenidate on visual attention capacity: a TVA-based study. Psychopharmacology, 210(3), 317 29. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00213-010-1823-x
Finke, K., Matthias, E., Keller, I., M ller, H. J., Schneider, W. X., & Bublak, P. (2012). How does phasic alerting improve performance in patients with unilateral neglect? A systematic analysis of attentional processing capacity and spatial weighting mechanisms. Neuropsychologia, 50(6), 1178 1189. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.02.008
Fleet, W. S., Valenstein, E., Watson, R. T., & Heilman, K. M. (1987). Dopamine agonist therapy for neglect in humans. Neurology, 37(11), 1765 1770.
Foucher, J. R., Otzenberger, H., & Gounot, D. (2004). Where arousal meets attention: A simultaneous fMRI and EEG recording study. NeuroImage, 22(2), 688 697.
Foxe, J. J., Simpson, G. V, & Ahlfors, S. P. (1998). Parieto-occipital ~10 Hz activity reflects anticipatory state of visual attention mechanisms. Neuroreport, 9(17), 3929 3933.
Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through neuronal coherence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(10), 474 80. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.08.011
Fu, K. M. G., Foxe, J. J., Murray, M. M., Higgins, B. A., Javitt, D. C., & Schroeder, C. E. (2001). Attention-dependent suppression of distracter visual input can be cross-modally cued as indexed by anticipatory parieto-occipital alpha-band oscillations. Cognitive Brain Research, 12(1), 145 152.
Fuke, S., Suo, S., Takahashi, N., Koike, H., Sasagawa, N., & Ishiura, S. (2001). The VNTR polymorphism of the human dopamine transporter (DAT1) gene affects gene expression. Pharmacogenomics Journal, 1(2), 152 156. http://doi.org/Cited By (since 1996) 174Export Date 22 July 2011
Funnell, M. G., Corballis, P. M., & Gazzaniga, M. S. (1999). A deficit in perceptual matching in the left hemisphere of a callosotomy patient. Neuropsychologia, 37(10), 1143 54.
Garner, K. G., Dux, P. E., Wagner, J., Cummins, T. D. R., Chambers, C. D., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2012). Attentional asymmetries in a visual orienting task are related to temperament. Cognition & Emotion, 26(8), 1 8. http://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2012.666205
Geeraerts, S., Lafosse, C., Vaes, N., Vandenbussche, E., & Verfaillie, K. (2007). Dysfunction of right-hemisphere attentional networks in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 30(1), 42 52.
Gonz lez, M. M. C., & Aston-Jones, G. (2006). Circadian regulation of arousal: role of the noradrenergic locus coeruleus system and light exposure. Sleep, 29(10), 1327 36.
Gooley, J. J., Ho Mien, I., St Hilaire, M. A., Yeo, S.-C., Chua, E. C.-P., van Reen, E.,   Lockley, S. W. (2012). Melanopsin and rod-cone photoreceptors play different roles in mediating pupillary light responses during exposure to continuous light in humans. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 32(41), 14242 53. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1321-12.2012
Gooley, J. J., Lu, J., Chou, T. C., Scammell, T. E., & Saper, C. B. (2001). Melanopsin in cells of origin of the retinohypothalamic tract. Nature Neuroscience, 4(12), 1165. http://doi.org/10.1038/nn768
Gorgoraptis, N., Mah, Y. H., MacHner, B., Singh-Curry, V., Malhotra, P., Hadji-Michael, M.,   Husain, M. (2012). The effects of the dopamine agonist rotigotine on hemispatial neglect following stroke. Brain, 135(8), 2478 2491.
Graetz, B. W., Sawyer, M. G., Hazell, P. L., Arney, F., & Baghurst, P. (2001). Validity of DSM-IVADHD subtypes in a nationally representative sample of Australian children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 40(12), 1410 7. http://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-200112000-00011
Gutwinski, S., L scher, A., Mahler, L., Kalbitzer, J., Heinz, A., & Bermpohl, F. (2011). Understanding left-handedness. Deutsches A rzteblatt International, 108(50), 849 53. http://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2011.0849
H ger, F., Volz, H. P., Gaser, C., Mentzel, H. J., Kaiser, W. A., & Sauer, H. (1998). Challenging the anterior attentional system with a continuous performance task: A functional magnetic resonance imaging approach. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 248(4), 161 170.
Halligan, P. W., Manning, L., & Marshall, J. C. (1990). Individual variation in line bisection: A study of four patients with right hemisphere damage and normal controls. Neuropsychologia, 28(10), 1043 1051.
Hanslmayr, S., Aslan, A., Staudigl, T., Klimesch, W., Herrmann, C. S., & B uml, K.-H. (2007). Prestimulus oscillations predict visual perception performance between and within subjects. NeuroImage, 37(4), 1465 73. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.07.011
Hari, R., Renvall, H., & Tanskanen, T. (2001). Left minineglect in dyslexic adults. Brain, 124(7), 1373 1380.
Heber, I. A., Siebertz, S., Wolter, M., Kuhlen, T., & Fimm, B. (2010). Horizontal and vertical pseudoneglect in peri- and extrapersonal space. Brain and Cognition, 73(3), 160 6. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2010.04.006
Heber, I. A., Valvoda, J. T., Kuhlen, T., & Fimm, B. (2008). Low arousal modulates visuospatial attention in three-dimensional virtual space. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 14(2), 309 317.
Heilman, K. M., Bowers, D., & Coslett, H. B. (1985). Directional hypokinesia: Prolonged reaction times for leftward movements in patients with right hemisphere lesions and neglect. Neurology, 35(6), 855 859.
Heinz, A., Goldman, D., Jones, D. W., Palmour, R., Hommer, D., Gorey, J. G.,   Weinberger, D. R. (2000). Genotype influences in vivo dopamine transporter availability in human striatum. Neuropsychopharmacology, 22(2), 133 139. http://doi.org/10.1016/s0893-133x(99)00099-8
Hickok, G., & Poeppel, D. (2007). The cortical organization of speech processing. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8(5), 393 402.
Holl nder, A., Corballis, M. C., & Hamm, J. P. (2005). Visual-field asymmetry in dual-stream RSVP. Neuropsychologia, 43(1), 35 40.
Holl nder, A., Hausmann, M., Hamm, J. P., & Corballis, M. C. (2005). Sex hormonal modulation of hemispheric asymmetries in the attentional blink. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 11(3), 263 272.
Hopfinger, J. B., Buonocore, M. H., & Mangun, G. R. (2000). The neural mechanisms of top-down attentional control. Nature Neuroscience, 3(3), 284 291.
Hugdahl, K. (1988). Handbook of Dichotic Listening: Theory, Methods and Research. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Husain, M., & Rorden, C. (2003). Non-spatially lateralized mechanisms in hemispatial neglect. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4(1), 26 36.
Isaacs, K. L., Barr, W. B., Nelson, P. K., & Devinsky, O. (2006). Degree of handedness and cerebral dominance. Neurology, 66(12), 1855 8. http://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000219623.28769.74
Iversen, S. D. (1984). Behavioural effects of manipulation of basal ganglia neurotransmitters. Ciba Foundation Symposium, 107, 183 200.
Jewell, G., & McCourt, M. E. (2000). Pseudoneglect: A review and meta-analysis of performance factors in line bisection tasks. Neuropsychologia, 38(1), 93 110.
Johannsen, P., Jakobsen, J., Bruhn, P., Hansen, S. B., Gee, A., St dkilde-J rgensen, H., & Gjedde, A. (1997). Cortical sites of sustained and divided attention in normal elderly humans. NeuroImage, 6(3), 145 155.
Kastner, S., Pinsk, M. A., De Weerd, P., Desimone, R., & Ungerleider, L. G. (1999). Increased activity in human visual cortex during directed attention in the absence of visual stimulation. Neuron, 22(4), 751 761.
Kelly, S. P., Gomez-Ramirez, M., & Foxe, J. J. (2009). The strength of anticipatory spatial biasing predicts target discrimination at attended locations: a high-density EEG study. The European Journal of Neuroscience, 30(11), 2224 34. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06980.x
Kelly, S. P., Lalor, E. C., Reilly, R. B., & Foxe, J. J. (2006). Increases in alpha oscillatory power reflect an active retinotopic mechanism for distracter suppression during sustained visuospatial attention. Journal of Neurophysiology, 95(6), 3844 3851.
Kelly, S. P., & O Connell, R. G. (2013). Internal and External Influences on the Rate of Sensory Evidence Accumulation in the Human Brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(50), 19434 19441.
Kinsbourne, M. (1977). Hemi-neglect and hemisphere rivalry. Advances in Neurology, 18, 41 49.
Kinsbourne, M. (1993). Orientational Bias Model of Unilateral Neglect: Evidence from Attentional Gradients within Hemispace. In I. H. Robertson & J. C. Marshall (Eds.), Unilateral Neglect: Clinical and Experimental Studies (pp. 63 86). Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Knecht, S., Deppe, M., Dr ger, B., Bobe, L., Lohmann, H., Ringelstein, E. B., & Henningsen, H. (2000). Language lateralization in healthy right-handers. Brain, 123(1), 74 81.
Knecht, S., Dr ger, B., Deppe, M., Bobe, L., Lohmann, H., Fl el, A.,   Henningsen, H. (2000). Handedness and hemispheric language dominance in healthy humans. Brain, 123(12), 2512 2518.
Kyllingsb k, S. (2006). Modeling visual attention. Behavior Research Methods, 38(1), 123 133.
Learmonth, G., Gallagher, A., Gibson, J., Thut, G., & Harvey, M. (2015). Intra- and Inter-Task Reliability of Spatial Attention Measures in Pseudoneglect. PloS One, 10(9), e0138379. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0138379
Liddle, E. B., Jackson, G. M., Rorden, C., & Jackson, S. R. (2009). Lateralized temporal order judgement in dyslexia. Neuropsychologia, 47(14), 3244 3254. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.08.007
Loftus, A. M., & Nicholls, M. E. R. (2012). Testing the activation-orientation account of spatial attentional asymmetries using transcranial direct current stimulation. Neuropsychologia, 50(11), 2573 2576.
Longo, M. R., & Lourenco, S. F. (2006). On the nature of near space: Effects of tool use and the transition to far space. Neuropsychologia, 44(6), 977 981.
Loughnane, G. M., Newman, D. P., Bellgrove, M. A., Lalor, E. C., Kelly, S. P., & O Connell, R. G. (2016). Target Selection Signals Influence Perceptual Decisions by Modulating the Onset and Rate of Evidence Accumulation. Current Biology. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.12.049
Loughnane, G. M., Shanley, J. P., Lalor, E. C., & O Connell, R. G. (2015). Behavioral and electrophysiological evidence of opposing lateral visuospatial asymmetries in the upper and lower visual fields. Cortex, 63, 220 231. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.09.003
Luck, S. J. (2012). Electrophysiological Correlates of the Focusing of Attention within Complex Visual Scenes: N2pc and Related ERP Components. In S. J. Luck & E. Kappenman (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Event-Related Potential Components (pp. 329 360).
Makris, N., Buka, S. L., Biederman, J., Papadimitriou, G. M., Hodge, S. M., Valera, E. M.,   Seidman, L. J. (2008). Attention and executive systems abnormalities in adults with childhood adhd: A DT-MRI study of connections. Cerebral Cortex, 18(5), 1210 1220.
Malhotra, P. A., Parton, A. D., Greenwood, R., & Husain, M. (2006). Noradrenergic modulation of space exploration in visual neglect. Annals of Neurology, 59(1), 186 190.
Manly, T., Dobler, V. B., Dodds, C. M., & George, M. A. (2005). Rightward shift in spatial awareness with declining alertness. Neuropsychologia, 43(12), 1721 1728.
Manning, L., Halligan, P. W., & Marshall, J. C. (1990). Individual variation in line bisection: A study of normal subjects with application to the interpretation of visual neglect. Neuropsychologia, 28(7), 647 655.
Marshall, T. R., Bergmann, T. O., & Jensen, O. (2015). Frontoparietal Structural Connectivity Mediates the Top-Down Control of Neuronal Synchronization Associated with Selective Attention. PLOS Biology, 13(10), e1002272. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002272
Marzi, C. A., Bisiacchi, P., & Nicoletti, R. (1991). Is interhemispheric transfer of visuomotor information asymmetric? Evidence from a meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia, 29(12), 1163 1177.
Matthews, N., Welch, L., Festa, E., & Clement, A. (2013). Remapping time across space. Journal of Vision, 13(8).
Matthias, E., Bublak, P., Costa, A., M ller, H. J., Schneider, W. X., & Finke, K. (2009). Attentional and sensory effects of lowered levels of intrinsic alertness. Neuropsychologia, 47(14), 3255 64. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.08.004
Matthias, E., Bublak, P., M ller, H. J., Schneider, W. X., Krummenacher, J., & Finke, K. (2010). The Influence of Alertness on Spatial and Nonspatial Components of Visual Attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 36(1), 38 56.
McCourt, M. E., & Garlinghouse, M. (2000). Asymmetries of visuospatial attention are modulated by viewing distance and visual field elevation: pseudoneglect in peripersonal and extrapersonal space. Cortex; a Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior, 36(5), 715 31.
McCourt, M. E., & Jewell, G. (1999). Visuospatial attention in line bisection: Stimulusmodulation of pseudoneglect. Neuropsychologia, 37(7), 843 855.
McCourt, M. E., & Olafson, C. (1997). Cognitive and perceptual influences on visual line bisection: Psychophysical and chronometric analyses of pseudoneglect. Neuropsychologia, 35(3), 369 380.
McGilchrist, I. (2009). The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Megreya, A. M., & Havard, C. (2011). Laterality : Asymmetries of Body , Brain and Cognition Left face matching bias : Right hemisphere dominance or scanning habits ?, (June 2013), 37 41.
Mesulam, M. M. (1981). A cortical network for directed attention and unilateral neglect. Annals of Neurology, 10(4), 309 25.
Milner, A. D., Brechmann, M., & Pagliarini, L. (1992). To halve and to halve not: An analysis of line bisection judgements in normal subjects. Neuropsychologia, 30(6), 515 526.
Newman, D. P., O Connell, R. G., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2013). Linking time-on-task, spatial bias and hemispheric activation asymmetry: A neural correlate of rightward attention drift. Neuropsychologia, 51(7), 1215 1223.
Newman, D. P., O Connell, R. G., Nathan, P. J., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2012). Dopamine transporter genotype predicts attentional asymmetry in healthy adults. Neuropsychologia, 50(12), 2823 2829.
Nicholls, M. E. R., Bradshaw, J. L., & Mattingley, J. B. (1999). Free-viewing perceptual asymmetries for the judgement of brightness, numerosity and size. Neuropsychologia, 37(3), 307 314. http://doi.org/10.1016/s0028-3932(98)00074-8
Nicholls, M. E. R., Forte, J. D., Loetscher, T., Orr, C. A., Yates, M. J., & Bradshaw, J. L. (2011). Near, yet so far: The effect of pictorial cues on spatial attention. Brain and Cognition, 76(3), 349 352. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2011.04.006
Nicholls, M. E. R., Hughes, G., Mattingley, J. B., & Bradshaw, J. L. (2004). Are object- and space-based attentional biases both important to free-viewing perceptual asymmetries? Exp Brain Res, 154(4), 513 520. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-003-1688-x
Nicholls, M. E. R., & Roberts, G. R. (2002). Can free-viewing perceptual asymmetries be explained by scanning, pre-motor or attentional biases? Cortex, 38(2), 113 136.
Nicholls, M. E. R., Thomas, N. A., Loetscher, T., Yates, M. J., Forte, J. D., & Spence, C. J. (2012). The relationship between vertical stimulation and horizontal attentional asymmetries The relationship between vertical stimulation and horizontal attentional asymmetries. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65(12), 2384 2396.
Nigg, J. T., Swanson, J. M., & Hinshaw, S. P. (1997). Covert visual spatial attention in boys with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Lateral effects, methylphenidate response and results for parents. Neuropsychologia, 35(2), 165 176. http://doi.org/10.1016/s0028-3932(96)00070-x
O Connell, R. G., Dockree, P. M., & Kelly, S. P. (2012). A supramodal accumulation-to-bound signal that determines perceptual decisions in humans. Nature Neuroscience, 15(12), 1729 1735. http://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3248
O Connell, R. G., Dockree, P. M., Robertson, I. H., Bellgrove, M. A., Foxe, J. J., & Kelly, S. P. (2009). Uncovering the neural signature of lapsing attention: electrophysiological signals predict errors up to 20 s before they occur. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 29(26), 8604 8611. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5967-08.2009
O Connell, R. G., Schneider, D., Hester, R., Mattingley, J. B., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2011). Attentional load asymmetrically affects early electrophysiological indices of visual orienting. Cereb Cortex, 21(5), 1056 1065.
Orr, C. A., & Nicholls, M. E. R. (2005). The nature and contribution of space- and object-based attentional biases to free-viewing perceptual asymmetries. Experimental Brain Research, 162(3), 384 393. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-004-2196-3
Pardo, J. V, Fox, P. T., & Raichle, M. E. (1991). Localization of a human system for sustained attention by positron emission tomography. Nature, 349(6304), 61 64.
Paus, T., Zatorre, R. J., Hofle, N., Caramanos, Z., Gotman, J., Petrides, M., & Evans, A. C. (1997). Time-related changes in neural systems underlying attention and arousal during the performance of an auditory vigilance task. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(3), 392 408.
Peers, P. V, Cusack, R., & Duncan, J. (2006). Modulation of spatial bias in the dual task paradigm: Evidence from patients with unilateral parietal lesions and controls. Neuropsychologia, 44(8), 1325 1335.
P rez, A., Peers, P. V, Vald s-Sosa, M., Gal n, L., Garc a, L., & Mart nez-Montes, E. (2009). Hemispheric modulations of alpha-band power reflect the rightward shift in attention induced by enhanced attentional load. Neuropsychologia, 47(1), 41 9. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.08.017
Perrin, F., Peigneux, P., Fuchs, S., Verhaeghe, S., Laureys, S., Middleton, B.,   Dijk, D.-J. (2004). Nonvisual responses to light exposure in the human brain during the circadian night. Current Biology : CB, 14(20), 1842 6.
Pfurtscheller, G. (2001). Functional brain imaging based on ERD/ERS. Vision Research, 41(10-11), 1257 1260.
Pierce, C. A., Jewell, G., & Mennemeier, M. (2003). Are psychophysical functions derived from line bisection reliable? Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 9(1), 72 78.
Posner, M. I., & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention system of the human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13, 25 42.
Post, R. B., Caufield, K. J., & Welch, R. B. (2001). Contributions of object- and space-based mechanisms to line bisection errors. Neuropsychologia, 39(8), 856 64.
Poynter, W., Ingram, P., & Minor, S. (2010). Visual field asymmetries in attention vary with self-reported attention deficits. Brain and Cognition, 72(3), 355 61. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2009.10.014
Previc, F. H. (2011). Functional specialization in the lower and upper visual fields in humans: Its ecological origins and neurophysiological implications. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 13(03), 519 542. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00080018
Pujol, J., Deus, J., Losilla, J. M., & Capdevila, A. (1999). Cerebral lateralization of language in normal left-handed people studied by functional MRI. Neurology, 52(5), 1038 1043.
Rahman, S. A., Flynn-Evans, E. E., Aeschbach, D., Brainard, G. C., Czeisler, C. A., & Lockley, S. W. (2014). Diurnal spectral sensitivity of the acute alerting effects of light. Sleep, 37(2), 271 81.
Ribolsi, M., Lisi, G., Di Lorenzo, G., Koch, G., Oliveri, M., Magni, V.,   Siracusano, A. (2013). Perceptual pseudoneglect in schizophrenia: candidate endophenotype and the role of the right parietal cortex. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 39(3), 601 7. http://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbs036
Rihs, T. A., Michel, C. M., & Thut, G. (2007). Mechanisms of selective inhibition in visual spatial attention are indexed by  -band EEG synchronization. European Journal of Neuroscience, 25(2), 603 610.
Ringman, J. M., Saver, J. L., Woolson, R. F., Clarke, W. R., & Adams, H. P. (2004). Frequency risk factors, anatomy, and course of unilateral neglect in an acute stroke cohort. Neurology, 63(3), 468 474.
Ringo, J. L., Doty, R. W., Demeter, S., & Simard, P. Y. (1994). Time is of the essence: A conjecture that hemispheric specialization arises from interhemispheric conduction delay. Cerebral Cortex, 4(4), X 343.
Roberts, A. O. H. (1980). Regression toward the mean and the regression-effect bias. In G. Echternacht (Ed.), New Directions for Testing and Measurement (Vol. 8, pp. 59 82). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Robertson, I. H., Manly, T., Beschin, N., Daini, R., Haeske-Dewick, H., H mberg, V.,   Weber, E. (1997). Auditory sustained attention is a marker of unilateral spatial neglect. Neuropsychologia, 35(12), 1527 1532.
Robertson, I. H., & Marshall, J. C. (1993). Unilateral neglect: clinical and experimental studies. Unilateral Neglect: Clinical and Experimental Studies. Hillsdale,NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates.
Robertson, I. H., Mattingley, J. B., Rorden, C., & Driver, J. (1998). Phasic alerting of neglect patients overcomes their spatial deficit in visual awareness. Nature, 395(6698), 169 172.
Rocconi, L. M., & Ethington, C. a. (2009). Assessing Longitudinal Change: Adjustment for Regression to the Mean Effects. Research in Higher Education, 50(4), 368 376. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11162-009-9119-x
Romei, V., Brodbeck, V., Michel, C., Amedi, A., Pascual-Leone, A., & Thut, G. (2008). Spontaneous fluctuations in posterior  -band EEG activity reflect variability in excitability of human visual areas. Cerebral Cortex, 18(9), 2010 2018.
Romei, V., Gross, J., & Thut, G. (2010). On the role of prestimulus alpha rhythms over occipito-parietal areas in visual input regulation: correlation or causation? The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 30(25), 8692 7. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0160-10.2010
Romei, V., Rihs, T., Brodbeck, V., & Thut, G. (2008). Resting electroencephalogram alpha-power over posterior sites indexes baseline visual cortex excitability. Neuroreport, 19(2), 203 208.
Rosch, R. E., Bishop, D. V. M., & Badcock, N. A. (2012). Lateralised visual attention is unrelated to language lateralisation, and not influenced by task difficulty - A functional transcranial Doppler study. Neuropsychologia, 50(5), 810 815.
Rueckert, L., Deravanesian, A., Baboorian, D., Lacalamita, A., & Repplinger, M. (2002). Pseudoneglect and the cross-over effect. Neuropsychologia, 40(2), 162 173. http://doi.org/10.1016/s0028-3932(01)00082-3
Ruff, C. C., Bestmann, S., Blankenburg, F., Bjoertomt, O., Josephs, O., Weiskopf, N.,   Driver, J. (2008). Distinct causal influences of parietal versus frontal areas on human visual cortex: evidence from concurrent TMS-fMRI. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y. : 1991), 18(4), 817 27. http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhm128
Ruff, C. C., Blankenburg, F., Bjoertomt, O., Bestmann, S., Weiskopf, N., & Driver, J. (2009). Hemispheric differences in frontal and parietal influences on human occipital cortex: direct confirmation with concurrent TMS-fMRI. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(6), 1146 61. http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21097
Sadaghiani, S., Scheeringa, R., Lehongre, K., Morillon, B., Giraud, A.-L. L., & Kleinschmidt, A. (2010). Intrinsic connectivity networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: A simultaneous electroencephalography/functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Journal of Neuroscience, 30(30), 10243 10250. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1004-10.2010
Scalf, P. E., Banich, M. T., Kramer, A. F., Narechania, K., & Simon, C. D. (2007). Double Take: Parallel Processing by the Cerebral Hemispheres Reduces the Attentional Blink. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 33(2), 298 329.
Schenkenberg, T., Bradford, D. C., & Ajax, E. T. (1980). Line bisection and unilateral visual neglect in patients with neurologic impairment. Neurology, 30(5), 509 517.
Schmidt, T. M., Chen, S.-K., & Hattar, S. (2011). Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells: many subtypes, diverse functions. Trends in Neurosciences, 34(11), 572 80.
Schmitz, R., & Peigneux, P. (2011). Age-related changes in visual pseudoneglect. Brain and Cognition, 76(3), 382 389. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2011.04.002
Schumann, C. M., Buonocore, M. H., & Amaral, D. G. (2001). Magnetic resonance imaging of the post-mortem autistic brain. J Autism Dev Disord, 31(6), 561 568.
Sereno, M. I., Pitzalis, S., & Martinez, A. (2001). Mapping of contralateral space in retinotopic coordinates by a parietal cortical area in humans. Science, 294(5545), 1350 1354. http://doi.org/10.1126/science.1063695
Shaw, P., Lalonde, F., Lepage, C., Rabin, C., Eckstrand, K., Sharp, W.,   Rapoport, J. (2009). Development of cortical asymmetry in typically developing children and its disruption in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(8), 888 896. http://doi.org/10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.103
Sheppard, D. M., Bradshaw, J. L., Mattingley, J. B., & Lee, P. (1999). Effects of stimulant medication on the lateralisation of line bisection judgements of children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 66(1), 57 63.
Shulman, G. L., Pope, D. L. W., Astafiev, S. V, McAvoy, M. P., Snyder, A. Z., & Corbetta, M. (2010). Right hemisphere dominance during spatial selective attention and target detection occurs outside the dorsal frontoparietal network. Journal of Neuroscience, 30(10), 3640 3651.
Siegel, M., Donner, T. H., Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., & Engel, A. K. (2008). Neuronal synchronization along the dorsal visual pathway reflects the focus of spatial attention. Neuron, 60(4), 709 19. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.010
Silk, T. J., Newman, D. P., Eramudugolla, R., Vance, A., & Bellgrove, M. A. (2014). Influence of methylphenidate on spatial attention asymmetry in adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Preliminary findings. Neuropsychologia, 56(1), 178 183. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.01.015
Silk, T. J., Vance, A., Rinehart, N., Bradshaw, J. L., & Cunnington, R. (2008). Dysfunction in the fronto-parietal network in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): An fMRI study. Brain Imaging and Behavior, 2(2), 123 131.
Silk, T. J., Vance, A., Rinehart, N., Egan, G., O Boyle, M., Bradshaw, J. L., & Cunnington, R. (2005). Decreased fronto-parietal activation in Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, combined type (ADHD-CT): an fMRI study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 187(3).
Silver, M. A., & Kastner, S. (2009). Topographic maps in human frontal and parietal cortex. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(11), 488 495.
Sinclair, K. L., Ponsford, J. L., Taffe, J., Lockley, S. W., & Rajaratnam, S. M. W. (2014). Randomized controlled trial of light therapy for fatigue following traumatic brain injury. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 28(4), 303 13. http://doi.org/10.1177/1545968313508472
Slagter, H. A., Davidson, R. J., & Tomer, R. (2010). Eye-blink rate predicts individual differences in pseudoneglect. Neuropsychologia, 48(5), 1265 1268. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.12.027
Slagter, H. A., Prinssen, S., Reteig, L. C., & Mazaheri, A. (2015). Facilitation and inhibition in attention: Functional dissociation of pre-stimulus alpha activity, P1, and N1 components. NeuroImage, 125, 25 35. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.058
Smigasiewicz, K., Shalgi, S., Hsieh, S., M ller, F., Jaffe, S., Chang, C.-C. C.,    migasiewicz, K. (2010). Left visual-field advantage in the dual-stream RSVP task and reading-direction: A study in three nations. Neuropsychologia, 48(10), 2852 2860. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.05.027
Smith, A., & Nutt, D. (1996). Noradrenaline and attention lapses. Nature, 380(6572), 291.
Sommer, I. E. C., Ramsey, N. F., Mandl, R. C. W., & Kahn, R. S. (2002). Language lateralization in monozygotic twin pairs concordant and discordant for handedness. Brain : A Journal of Neurology, 125(Pt 12), 2710 8.
Sowell, E. R., Thompson, P. M., Welcome, S. E., Henkenius, A. L., Toga, A. W., & Peterson, B. S. (2003). Cortical abnormalities in children and adolescents with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Lancet, 362(9397), 1699 1707.
Stefanatos, G. A., & Wasserstein, J. (2006). Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder as a right hemisphere syndrome. Selective literature review and detailed neuropsychological case studies. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences., 931, 172 195.
Steinmetz, H., Volkmann, J., J ncke, L., & Freund, H. J. (1991). Anatomical left-right asymmetry of language-related temporal cortex is different in left- and right-handers. Annals of Neurology, 29(3), 315 9. http://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410290314
Stenneken, P., Egetemeir, J., Schulte-K rne, G., M ller, H. J., Schneider, W. X., & Finke, K. (2011). Slow perceptual processing at the core of developmental dyslexia: A parameter-based assessment of visual attention. Neuropsychologia, 49(12), 3454 3465.
Sturm, W., De Simone, A., Krause, B. J., Specht, K., Hesselmann, V., Radermacher, I.,   Willmes, K. (1999). Functional anatomy of intrinsic alertness: Evidence for a fronto-parietal-thalamic-brainstem network in the right hemisphere. Neuropsychologia, 37(7), 797 805.
Sturm, W., Longoni, F., Fimm, B., Dietrich, T., Weis, S., Kemna, S.,   Willmes, K. (2004). Network for auditory intrinsic alertness: A PET study. Neuropsychologia, 42(5), 563 568.
Sturm, W., & Willmes, K. (2001). On the functional neuroanatomy of intrinsic and phasic alertness. NeuroImage, 14(1 II), S76 S84.
Sun, T., & Walsh, C. A. A. (2006). Molecular approaches to brain asymmetry and handedness. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7(8), 655 662. http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1930
Sylvester, C. M., Shulman, G. L., Jack, A. I., & Corbetta, M. (2007). Asymmetry of anticipatory activity in visual cortex predicts the locus of attention and perception. Journal of Neuroscience, 27(52), 14424 14433.
Szaflarski, J. P., Binder, J. R., Possing, E. T., McKiernan, K. A., Ward, B. D., & Hammeke, T. A. (2002). Language lateralization in left-handed and ambidextrous people: fMRI data. Neurology, 59(2), 238 44.
Szczepanski, S. M., & Kastner, S. (2013). Shifting attentional priorities: control of spatial attention through hemispheric competition. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 33(12), 5411 21. http://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4089-12.2013
Ter Huurne, N., Onnink, M., Kan, C., Franke, B., Buitelaar, J., & Jensen, O. (2013). Behavioral consequences of aberrant alpha lateralization in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 74(3), 227 33. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.02.001
Thiebaut de Schotten, M., Dell Acqua, F., Forkel, S. J., Simmons, A., Vergani, F., Murphy, D. G. M., & Catani, M. (2011). A lateralized brain network for visuospatial attention. Nature Neuroscience, 14(10), 1245 1246.
Thiebaut De Schotten, M., Urbanski, M., Duffau, H., Volle, E., L vy, R., Dubois, B., & Bartolomeo, P. (2005). Direct evidence for a parietal-frontal pathway subserving spatial awareness in humans. Science, 309(5744), 2226 2228.
Thomas, N. A., & Elias, L. J. (2010). Do perceptual asymmetries differ in peripersonal and extrapersonal space? Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 16(1), 210 214.
Thomas, N. A., Loetscher, T., & Nicholls, M. E. R. (2012). Central fixations with rightward deviations: Saccadic eye movements on the landmark task. Experimental Brain Research, 220(1), 29 39. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3113-9
Thut, G., Nietzel, A., Brandt, S. A., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2006).  -Band electroencephalographic activity over occipital cortex indexes visuospatial attention bias and predicts visual target detection. Journal of Neuroscience, 26(37), 9494 9502.
Thut, G., Veniero, D., Romei, V., Miniussi, C., Schyns, P., & Gross, J. (2011). Rhythmic TMS causes local entrainment of natural oscillatory signatures. Current Biology : CB, 21(14), 1176 85. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.05.049
Tomer, R. (2008). Attentional bias as trait: Correlations with novelty seeking. Neuropsychologia, 46(7), 2064 2070.
Tomer, R., Slagter, H. A., Christian, B. T., Fox, A. S., King, C. R., Murali, D., & Davidson, R. J. (2012). Dopamine Asymmetries Predict Orienting Bias in Healthy Individuals. Cerebral Cortex, Epub ahead. http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs277
Vaid, J., & Singh, M. (1989). Asymmetries in the perception of facial affect: is there an influence of reading habits? Neuropsychologia, 27(10), 1277 87.
Van Dijk, H., Schoffelen, J. M., Oostenveld, R., & Jensen, O. (2008). Prestimulus oscillatory activity in the alpha band predicts visual discrimination ability. Journal of Neuroscience, 28(8), 1816 1823.
van Kessel, M. E., van Nes, I. J. W., Brouwer, W. H., Geurts, A. C. H., & Fasotti, L. (2010). Visuospatial asymmetry and non-spatial attention in subacute stroke patients with and without neglect. Cortex, 46(5), 602 612.
van Kessel, M. E., Van Nes, I. J. W., Geurts, A. C. H., Brouwer, W. H., & Fasotti, L. (2013). Visuospatial asymmetry in dual-task performance after subacute stroke. Journal of Neuropsychology, 7(1), 72 90. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-6653.2012.02036.x
Van Vleet, T. M., & DeGutis, J. M. (2013). The nonspatial side of spatial neglect and related approaches to treatment. Progress in Brain Research, 207, 327 49. http://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63327-9.00012-6
Vance, A., Silk, T. J., Casey, M., Rinehart, N. J., Bradshaw, J. L., Bellgrove, M. A., & Cunnington, R. (2007). Right parietal dysfunction in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, combined type: a functional MRI study. Molecular Psychiatry, 12(9), 793,826 832.
Vandewalle, G., Balteau, E., Phillips, C., Degueldre, C., Moreau, V., Sterpenich, V.,   Maquet, P. (2006). Daytime light exposure dynamically enhances brain responses. Current Biology : CB, 16(16), 1616 21.
Vandewalle, G., Collignon, O., Hull, J. T., Daneault, V., Albouy, G., Lepore, F.,   Carrier, J. (2013). Blue light stimulates cognitive brain activity in visually blind individuals. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 25(12), 2072 85. http://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00450
Vandewalle, G., Gais, S., Schabus, M., Balteau, E., Carrier, J., Darsaud, A.,   Maquet, P. (2007). Wavelength-dependent modulation of brain responses to a working memory task by daytime light exposure. Cerebral Cortex (New York, N.Y. : 1991), 17(12), 2788 95. http://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhm007
Vandewalle, G., Maquet, P., & Dijk, D.-J. (2009). Light as a modulator of cognitive brain function. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(10), 429 38. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.07.004
Vandewalle, G., Schmidt, C., Albouy, G., Sterpenich, V., Darsaud, A., Rauchs, G.,   Dijk, D.-J. (2007). Brain responses to violet, blue, and green monochromatic light exposures in humans: prominent role of blue light and the brainstem. PloS One, 2(11), e1247. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0001247
VanNess, S. H., Owens, M. J., & Kilts, C. D. (2005). The variable number of tandem repeats element in DAT1 regulates in vitro dopamine transporter density. BMC Genetics, 6. http://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2156-6-55
Verdon, V., Schwartz, S., Lovblad, K. O., Hauert, C. A., & Vuilleumier, P. (2010). Neuroanatomy of hemispatial neglect and its functional components: A study using voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping. Brain, 133(3), 880 894. http://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awp305
Verleger, R., M ller, F., Kuniecki, M.,  migasiewicz, K., Groppa, S., & Siebner, H. R. (2010). The left visual-field advantage in rapid visual presentationis amplified rather than reduced by posterior-parietal rTMS. Experimental Brain Research, 203(2), 355 365.
Verleger, R.,  migasiewicz, K., & M ller, F. (2011). Mechanisms underlying the left visual-field advantage in the dual stream RSVP task: Evidence from N2pc, P3, and distractor-evoked VEPs. Psychophysiology, 48(8), 1096 1106.
Verleger, R., Sprenger, A., Gebauer, S., Fritzmannova, M., Friedrich, M., Kraft, S., & Ja kowski, P. (2009). On why left events are the right ones: Neural mechanisms underlying the left-hemifield advantage in rapid serial visual presentation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(3), 474 488.
Voeller, K. K. S., & Heilman, K. M. (1988). Attention deficit disorder in children: A neglect syndrome? Neurology, 38(5), 806 808. http://doi.org/Cited By (since 1996) 68Export Date 22 July 2011
Voyer, D. (1996). On the magnitude of laterality effects and sex differences in functional lateralities. Laterality, 1(1), 51 83.
Voyer, D., Voyer, S. D., & Tramonte, L. (2012). Free-viewing laterality tasks: A multilevel meta-analysis. Neuropsychology, 26(5), 551 567.
Vuilleumier, P. (2013). Mapping the functional neuroanatomy of spatial neglect and human parietal lobe functions: progress and challenges. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1296, 50 74. http://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.12161
Wernicke, C. (1874). Der aphasische symptomenkomplex: Eine psychologische Studie auf anatomomischer Basis. Breslau, Germany: Cohn and Weigert.
Whitehouse, A. J. O., & Bishop, D. V. M. (2009). Hemispheric division of function is the result of independent probabilistic biases. Neuropsychologia, 47(8-9), 1938 1943.
Willems, R. M., Van der Haegen, L., Fisher, S. E., & Francks, C. (2014). On the other hand: including left-handers in cognitive neuroscience and neurogenetics. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 15(3), 193 201. http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3679
Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (1999). Electrophysiological measurement of rapid shifts of attention during visual search. Nature, 400(6747), 867 9. http://doi.org/10.1038/23698
Worden, M. S., Foxe, J. J., Wang, N., & Simpson, G. V. (2000). Anticipatory biasing of visuospatial attention indexed by retinotopically specific alpha-band electroencephalography increases over occipital cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience : The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 20(6).
Yamagishi, N., Callan, D. E., Anderson, S. J., & Kawato, M. (2008). Attentional changes in pre-stimulus oscillatory activity within early visual cortex are predictive of human visual performance. Brain Research, 1197, 115 22. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2007.12.063
Young, A. W., & Ratcliff, G. (1983). Visuospatial abilities of the right hemisphere. In A. W. Young (Ed.), Functions of the right cerebral hemisphere . London: Academic Press.
Zaidi, F. H., Hull, J. T., Peirson, S. N., Wulff, K., Aeschbach, D., Gooley, J. J.,   Lockley, S. W. (2007). Short-Wavelength Light Sensitivity of Circadian, Pupillary, and Visual Awareness in Humans Lacking an Outer Retina. Current Biology, 17(24), 2122 2128.
Zozulinsky, P., Greenbaum, L., Brande-Eilat, N., Braun, Y., Shalev, I., & Tomer, R. (2014). Dopamine system genes are associated with orienting bias among healthy individuals. Neuropsychologia, 62(1), 48 54. 


